Preach the Word: Essays on Expository Preaching: In Honor of R. Kent Hughes
Chapter 1: The Hermeneutical Distinctives of Expository Preaching
David Jackman
No one can seek to be a preacher of God's Word on a regular basis today without becoming acutely conscious of the cultural barriers, challenges, and constraints of our contemporary culture. As the tide of anti-Christian secularism appears to be assuming tsunami proportions, all Bible preachers are made supremely aware of our own inadequacies, vulnerability, and weakness, no matter how apparently fruitful and outwardly effective those ministries may be. It would be tempting to imagine that we are called to preach at a particularly difficult time in the church's history, or that God can only use men of prodigious talent in the face of such overwhelming opposition. But we would be wrong. There is indeed "nothing new under the sun."
Expository Preaching: The Difficulty of the Task
In 1592, William Perkins, an English Puritan scholar-pastor and a fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, wrote a book entitled  The Art of Prophesying.  Only thirty-four years of age, Perkins lamented the scarcity of true biblical ministers - a truth that he claimed was self-evident from the experience of all ages. His complaint was that few men of quality and ability seek out the calling of the preaching ministry. Moreover, even of those who have the titles, very few really deserve the honorable names of messenger ( angelos ) and interpreter. Even at the ascendancy of Puritan influence, in the last decade of the Elizabethan era, it was apparently still very difficult to find godly pastors who could exercise effective expository ministries.  Perkins identified three causes of this dilemma. First, he cited the contempt with which the calling is treated, recognizing that biblical ministry will always be hated by the world since by its very nature it reveals human sin and unmasks hypocrisy. Second, Perkins drew attention to the immense difficulty of discharging the duties of the ministry well. The charge of the cure of souls was (and is) an overwhelming responsibility. The pastor-teacher must speak to God on behalf of the people, as well as speaking to the people on behalf of God, and who is sufficient for these things? Lastly, Perkins focused on the inadequacy of financial recompense and its accompanying status. Who would accept the contempt and the difficulties for such a paucity of reward? Small wonder, he said, that the sharpest minds of the day turn to the law as their chosen profession. And that was over four hundred years ago!
The Contemporary Context
The issues besetting a biblical teaching ministry today are nothing new, though they are more accentuated. While the Reformation era regarded preaching as "the source and spring of Christian faith," it is now marginalized and increasingly jettisoned. The hostility of the culture has always been a "given," but the skepticism and rejection of sound biblical teaching at the heart of the local church's life of ministry - from within the congregation itself - is perhaps a defining aspect of the current crisis. It is, of course, evidence of the world's waves swamping and threatening the very viability of the church's boat. A worldly church is always going to reject the clarity of biblical revelation. Such people "will not endure sound teaching, but having itching ears they will accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their own passions, and will turn away from listening to the truth and wander off into myths" (2 Tim. 4:3-4). These can be the myths of atheistic humanism or the psychiatrist's couch, the flattering spin of the politicians and the advertisers, or the hard-nosed ethos of corporate capitalism and the culture of success. They are all around us, and they are the powerful siren songs of our unbelieving world.  So, when we are told that biblical preaching is presumptuous, or naïve, or ineffective, or all three, we know that the ocean is truly within the boat and that it will soon be sunk unless the preachers begin bailing. That is why a biblical ministry, such as College Church has enjoyed under our esteemed brother Kent these many years, stands as a beacon light in the darkness and crosscurrents of contemporary confusion. We salute a ministry devoted to "the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth" and thank God for the countless lives influenced from that pulpit in both the spoken and the written word, and the numerous ministries put back on track by this powerful example and model. At the heart of this ministry lies the conviction that it is the Word of God in the hands of the Spirit of God that accomplishes the work of God - through the preacher, the man of God.
The Proclamation Trust
That same conviction lies at the heart of the ministry of The Proclamation Trust in the United Kingdom that, in informal partnership with the Simeon Trust in the United States, seeks to bring about the renaissance and development of biblical expository preaching, characterized by careful listening to God in his Word and its powerful application to the lives of both the preacher and his hearers, with penetrating, practical relevance.  John Stott has often spoken of effective preaching as a bridge, firmly grounded at either end, both in the biblical text, with all its unchanging truth, and in the contemporary world, with all its urgent need as expressed in darkened understanding and hardened hearts (Eph. 4:18). Both firm groundings are certainly characteristic of the ministry of Dick Lucas, in which The Proclamation Trust had its origins.  Founded in 1986, the Trust at its inception could already look back over twenty-five years of extraordinary growth and fruitfulness. Dick Lucas was appointed in 1961 as rector of St. Helen's Bishopsgate in the heart of the business community of the city of London. Building on lunchtime services for those working in "the Square Mile," extending to Bible study and discipleship groups, St. Helen's added Sunday evening services for students and young graduates and in due course a families' work on Sunday mornings, so that over the years, countless numbers of people heard the Word of the Lord. For many, this led to their conversion to Christ and for even more the nurture and growth of a vigorous life of discipleship.  The simple purpose of The Proclamation Trust is to train and equip a new generation of biblical preachers to do that same work, dependent on the same Spirit to use the same Word to multiply gospel growth across the land and around the world. This is carried out through two main programs. The first is an annual schedule of preaching conferences for ministers, lay preachers, and seminarians, culminating each year in June with the Evangelical Ministers Assembly at St. Helen's, which draws together as many as nine hundred Christian workers from all over the United Kingdom, Europe, and beyond. The second is a full-time study program for one academic year called the Cornhill Training Course, which concentrates on providing practical tools for biblical expository ministry.
The Hermeneutical Principles of Expository Preaching
These tools constitute the foundational hermeneutic on which expository proclamation of biblical truth can be most effectively built. They are very basic, and one might be tempted to think all too obvious, but experience has shown over the years that such principles have not been widely taught or assimilated. In the midst of the highly demanding academic agenda of the seminary, very little time can be given to the practicalities of biblical preaching. As a result, young ministers tend on the one hand to read academic essays to their congregations and simply relate their textual exegesis or, on the other, to move into an "inspirational" mode that is basically exhortation frequently disconnected from the plain meaning of Scripture. Either way, "the hungry sheep look up and are not fed" (to borrow Milton's formulation in his poem "Lycidas"). But there is no valid alternative plan for the nourishment of God's flock other than for the under-shepherds to feed them with the rich pastures of God's Word. So, how can we encourage each other to keep working at this most demanding, but also most rewarding, of ministry responsibilities?
Listening to the Biblical Text
Everything depends upon our detailed, careful, and disciplined reading of the text. Effective preaching, as Eugene Peterson has pointed out in his excellent book  Working the Angles,  begins with "passionate hearers, not cool analysts." Our problem is that the skills of literary analysis we have been taught often seem to deprive us of any sense of immediacy, or even intimacy, in hearing the living Word of the living God through the paragraphs, sentences, and individual words of Scripture. The text needs to be seen not as an object to be analyzed, dissected, or even "mastered" so that we can then begin to "do something with the Bible." Rather, we need to hear it as the urgent, present-tense message of the present-tense God (I AM) through our minds to our hearts to energize our wills in faith and obedience. Then the Bible is doing something with, in, and to us. If the preacher's life is being changed through his encounter with God in the "living and enduring Word" (1 Pet. 1:23 NIV), he really does have a message to proclaim, not simply from the written page but from the heart.  This is why prayer is so central to the process of preparation. We are entirely dependent on God's Spirit to open our blind eyes, unstop our deaf ears, and soften our hardened hearts, so at every stage in preparing to preach we seek the author's help to rightly hear and handle his Word of truth. From the first reading of the text to the final words of the sermon, we are entirely dependent on the gracious work of the Spirit, in preacher and hearers alike, to bring understanding, to generate faith, and to empower obedience.  Learning to listen by opening our eyes is one of the key skills for the biblical preacher to develop. We need to see what is really there and what is not. Like a person with hearing difficulties, we need to strain to catch every detail of vocabulary and nuance of tone in our Lord's conversation with us in the unique and specific parts of Scripture. But the problem with a written text, which increases the more familiar we think we are with it, is our tendency to skim-read it in order to find what we already know is there. We then deal with general ideas rather than give attention to detail, and the resulting sermons exist in a world of theological abstraction. So much preaching is bland and predictable because there has been no move toward studying the text beyond its general themes and familiar ideas to the uniqueness of this particular Word of the Lord. The preacher has been content with a superficial, surface reading in which he has viewed the text through the prescription lenses of his own evangelical framework. This means that he has been in control of the text, assessing it, dissecting it, allowing it to illustrate the principles of his framework that he is determined to preach, but not permitting the text to be in the driver's seat, controlling the sermon.  What needs to be happening in the preparation process is for the text to be challenging our framework, and this is achieved by questioning. Obviously, our first question will always be, "What precisely is this text saying?" But then there are other key questions with which we can sharpen our listening skills. For example, "Why does the biblical author say it in these words?" This may alert us to specialist vocabulary that often opens up major themes in the rest of the book of which our preaching passage is a part. Or it may challenge our pastoral rules of thumb, or even our doctrinal formulations. Additionally, we can ask, "Why is the author saying it to these people (his original readers)?" This raises the whole issue of contexts, both historical and theological, both of the book in the Bible and the passage in the book. Finally, "Why does the author say it here, at this particular point in his work?" This is an inquiry about the literary context, which helps us to build a picture of the development of the book's major teaching themes, which will also greatly help with application of the passage to the context of today.  These questions help to discipline us to read the passage with our antennae up, specifically on the lookout for the challenges and surprises. Anything that pulls me up short and makes me say, "I wouldn't have said that" or "I wouldn't have used those words" is a great step forward in helping me listen to the message of this particular text. My presuppositions are being challenged and my habitual ways of thinking are being reshaped as the text, with its own specific content, questions my framework.
Approaching a Text Inductively
Like a lens sharpening the focus, careful observation of this sort enables the reader to probe beneath the immediate surface meaning of the text to begin to grapple with its intended purpose and significance. That is what produces clarity in exposition and gives the sermon an edge to penetrate beyond confused half-understanding and generalized notions. It enables the unique richness of the detail of a passage to have its intended effect, and when that happens the Bible really does speak. But it doesn't happen without a good deal of effort and hard work. The reason for this is that we all read the Bible through our own presuppositions. Inevitably, we cannot approach any text without inputting our own cultural conditioning into our reading of it. We have a particular background. We live at a particular time in history. Our past experience, values, and priorities have all combined to build up a personal, individual framework of thought and behavior, convictions and attitudes, that makes each of us the unique people we are. But this framework can be the enemy of careful observation.  The danger is that certain words or ideas in the text will trigger ideas in the preacher's memory bank that are then downloaded and uncritically included in a sermon. So we end up preaching our framework rather than the biblical text, unless the Bible text is questioning our framework every time we are preparing. It is not that framework preaching is wrong if the framework is itself biblically orthodox. What is said will probably be true, but the preaching will soon become reductionist and predictable. The problem is that such preaching does not challenge the church, and it will not change the world. It becomes impository of the preacher's word upon the text, which has to dance to the preacher's tune - the agenda that he has constructed - rather than being expository of the fundamental meaning of the Bible, with all its necessary challenges and unsettling disturbance to our inherently sinful, this-worldly patterns of thought and behavior. In John Stott's words, it is the function of biblical preaching both "to disturb the comfortable and then to comfort the disturbed." And that process begins with the preacher in his preparation.  There is an old saying that a text out of context is merely a pretext. Its truth is constantly demonstrated in many a pulpit, where the preacher's "angle" on the subject becomes the key constituent of the sermon, irrespective of why the text was originally written or even what it actually teaches. But it is a very important inference from our evangelical doctrine of Scripture that God's revelation will itself provide us with divinely given authoritative keys as to how to unpack and use its contents. Our submission to Scripture, as a vital part of our submission to Scripture's Lord, means that we must be prepared to teach the Bible not only in its truth-content but also to use its own distinctive methodologies. We must cut with the grain of the biblical text. This should affect our preaching schedules and the shape of the pulpit diet for our congregations, as much as it does the contents of an individual sermon.  Much of the benefit that has flowed so consistently from the College Church pulpit is attributable to the systematic consecutive exposition of Scripture, book by book, as the solid "given" of the preaching ministry. We should study and preach the Bible book by book since this is how God has provided it for us. Indeed, there is a real sense in which the whole Bible is one book, comprised of its sixty-six separate but clearly integrated units, each one having its own specific purpose and major themes. The principle of the "melodic line," or the theme tune of every book, is an important tool to work with. What does this particular book contribute to the one great story of salvation history, as God's plan to rescue humanity from its rebellion and to reconcile rebels to himself is worked out through the ages and comes to its culmination and fulfillment in Christ? What would we  not  know if this book were not included in the sixty-six? What is its distinctive value and message? What is the tune it plays?
The Journey to the World of the Biblical Text
This is where the preacher will need to travel back to the original setting and context of the first hearers in order to bring the unchanging meaning of this particular book or passage with penetration and obvious relevance into the world of today. It might seem strange to say that we must travel to first-century Corinth or Galatia in order to hear the Word of the living God for twenty-first-century London or Chicago, but it is absolutely true. If we do not wrestle with what our text meant to  them,  when it was first spoken or written, we shall never be able to apply its message with any sort of accuracy or penetration to our hearers today. This does not mean that we all need to be scholars in the original languages or in the biblical historical background, though we are thankful to God for those who are, and we can benefit greatly from their labors. But it is the genius of a teaching ministry, with time set apart for the study of the Scripture, to enable those who listen to the preaching to be as close to the situation of the original readers as it is possible to be so as to remove as many barriers to understanding as we can.  The expository preacher wants always to be giving the Bible back into the hands of the congregation. The Bible is not the preserve of the expert but the Word of God for everybody, everywhere. However, it does come to us in the form of words spoken by and to people in human history. There is a particularity about all its contents, tying its origin to a particular time and place, to specific spokesmen, and its purposes to particular groups of recipients. Yet what is revealed is of eternal significance and validity precisely because it is the "forever" Word of the infinite and eternal God, working in and from its original historical context but transcending those limitations as it addresses the whole human race across planet earth at every point of time.  God did not produce a book of rules or a set of systematized theological propositions, though both can rightly be adduced from the Bible. Its fundamental format is neither abstract nor theoretical. God spoke to real people in real situations. He intervened in space-time history, explaining his actions before and interpreting them afterwards. Scripture is the story of the loving purposes of God in our redemption from paradise lost in Eden, to the appearance of the holy city, the New Jerusalem, and the establishment of God's eternal kingdom. But if we don't get right what the revelation of Scripture meant to its original recipients, we shall certainly not get right its meaning and significance for us today.
The Genres of the Bible
That is why we must take seriously the different types of biblical literature through which God speaks still - poetry, historical narrative, prophecy, proverbial sayings, apocalypse, parables, allegories, sermons, letters, theological arguments, and so on. They are very different styles of writing with specific patterns and accepted conventions governing their use and referencing their meaning. In recent years a good deal of attention has been given to genre studies, so that each type of biblical writing is properly understood within its own framework of reference. This too will be an important set of tools for the biblical preacher to be able to own and use.  One of the most obvious examples would be the symbolic language of the apocalyptic tradition in Jewish literature, exemplified for us in books like Daniel, Zechariah, or Revelation. To read the numerical and other symbolic ingredients "in the flat" as literal facts or events would be to misunderstand how the genre works. This is not to devalue or avoid the plain meaning of Scripture in any way, but rather to recognize that its truth is not literal where the writing is metaphorical or symbolic, where that literary convention is being employed. After all, I have yet to meet anyone who imagines that Isaiah 55:12 will have a literal fulfillment: "The mountains and the hills before you shall break forth into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands"! However, we are not always so aware of how the genres work in other areas of the Bible.  To understand something of the chiastic structure of Hebrew thinking can be a great help in getting to the heart of a detailed Old Testament narrative or to the main burden of a prophetic oracle. With the central point as the focus of the passage, all that precedes and follows it augments or explains its significance. At the heart of a conflict narrative there is usually a key turning point that resolves the issue and after which everything is different. To see that as the major teaching point can unlock all the details of the story to accomplish their intended purpose. To realize that a prophetic oracle can have more than one point of fulfillment or level of significance can enable the message of the prophet to come alive to us today. We do need to explore what it meant to the people of God when the oracle was first delivered, and we do need to realize that what it reveals of God is unchangeably true. But we cannot simply put the contemporary Christian congregation into the same position as Old Testament Israel. Both are covenant peoples, but what is the significance of the coming of Christ and of the new and better covenant? And what of the prophecy remains to be fulfilled through Christ in the eternal kingdom, beyond the present gospel age? As Martin Luther said, "We can only read the Bible forwards, but we have to understand it backwards." We must always read the Old Testament in the light of the New if we are not to reinstitute sacramental religion or look for the rebuilding of the temple in Jerusalem. Recognizing the different types of gospel materials, understanding the intricacies of apostolic theological argument, looking for the affective, emotional ingredients of biblical poetry - these and other genre-specific tools will be a great help to the Bible preacher in allowing the text to speak for itself in its own authentic voice.  All too often, evangelical preaching has put every text through the same mincing machine of a particular systematized theology so that its content is dissected and laid out in terms of doctrinal propositions with ethical applications, in an identical way, irrespective of whether the original was poetry or prose, proverb or parable. This can give expository preaching a bad name because its content is abstract and predictable, which often becomes irrelevant and boring to the hearers. It also fails to recognize that the God of the Bible, whose love of variety and endless ingenuity are reflected in his physical creation, is hardly likely to reveal himself with any less diversity in his inspired written text. Good expositors learn to work with the literary distinctives of the genres and not to iron them out into a standard, flattened three-point sermon. We need to learn how to value and benefit from the intricate arguments and precise vocabulary of the epistle, the twist in a parable, the punch line of a gospel pronouncement story, the provocation of a wisdom saying, the turning point of a narrative, the multiple fulfillment levels of a prophecy, and the emotive, affective ingredients of a poem.
The Return Journey: Applying the Biblical Text
Every expositor knows that once the meaning of the biblical text has been stated and explained, its application to the contemporary hearers still remains to be spelled out. Some preachers assert that this is the sovereign work of the Holy Spirit and not for us to try to accomplish. But the pattern of the New Testament epistles strongly underlines the practical application of the propositional teaching content, and while we know we cannot ourselves root God's Word into anyone's life, we should surely expect the Holy Spirit graciously to do this work as we apply the Word to our current situations. Application that is faithful and authentic is largely stimulated by context. To understand the original significance helps us to direct God's truth in its life-changing power with penetrating accuracy into our own lives and the lives of those who listen to us.  This process does not start with us in the modern world but with the given text. The Bible is not provided to answer the spiritual whims and fancies of the twenty-first century. We can and do come to it with our own cultural questions. But the good expositor is more interested in asking the Bible's questions, which, since they are God's questions, are going to be much more important and far more significant than any we, in our ignorance and spiritual blindness, could ever pose. To do the contextual work faithfully at the biblical end will ensure that the unchanging text is truly heard in the modern world, with all its potency to teach, rebuke, correct, and train in righteousness. Then it really is the Word that is doing its characteristic work. And that work really is the Lord's.  The biblical method of application has another great advantage. It delivers us from the tyranny of the currently fashionable norms of our own particular Christian subculture. So often in preaching, the application is mass-produced out of the current orthodoxies and enthusiasms of the wider church scene. The latest book, the newest ideas, the most exciting models are bolted onto a biblical text with very little authenticity. Because such applications are usually in the form of obligation: "We ought to . . .", followed by the challenge, "so  are  you . . . ?" they quickly develop into legalism and soulless duty. The emphasis is then more and more on doing Christian things (giving, praying, witnessing) so that grace is effectively evacuated from the preaching. Attention becomes focused on the present - on me and my world, on my current concerns, or on our congregation and its growth and prosperity. It is almost as though there is no great eternal plan and no universal church. We become entirely obsessed with our own concerns, the prisoners of our inflated egos.  There is a dangerous and immediate consequence of this contemporary sort of preaching. The hearers soon become adept at screening out the all-too-predictable challenges that masquerade as application. Successful life-changing application, however, is launched from the text in its original context and flies under the radar screen with an irresistible power. When the text surprises me, so that my response is "so,  that's  what it means . . . of course!" then the Word is really at work. The mind is persuaded by the truth and the heart is softened to receive it and put it into practice. Finally, the will is energized to active obedience, to make the necessary life changes in thought and behavior, in the power of that same Holy Spirit who has been communicating through his inspired Word.
The Heart of Expository Preaching
These are some of the skills we seek to develop in the courses, conferences, and media products of The Proclamation Trust. They are not new, nor are they complex, but they are largely neglected and sadly underpracticed. Of course, they call for hard work, which demands time, energy, and application, and these, in turn, are things that many preachers have decided are not a priority in their schedule. I believe it is greatly to the detriment of our churches. This collection of essays celebrates a different set of values, modeled consistently over the many years of Kent's ministry as he has put the Word of God in the hands of the Spirit of God to accomplish his own unique, Christ-glorifying work. Such preaching priorities badly need to be reclaimed across our enfeebled Western churches.  Homiletics, the introduction of novel multimedia presentations, or any other new techniques are not where we need to look for a revival of the Word of God in our culture. We need to look to preaching that has developed from listening passionately to Scripture and to preachers who incarnate that truth in their lives and seek to channel it to their hearers. We shall all do it differently, since, in Phillips Brookes's famous definition, preaching is "truth through personality." But we need to pray and work for an army of young preachers to be raised up by God to reclaim the pulpits of Western culture for faithful, penetrating, and life-changing proclamation of God's Word as "the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth."  Effective exposition finds its origin and power not so much in clever sermon construction, as in detailed, obedient listening to God's voice in the text. The Bible really must be in the driver's seat, dictating the content of the message, its contemporary application, and even its shape. When we serve God's Word in this way we come to realize that the Bible is a book about God long before it is a book about us, and that its strongest relevance and most urgent application is to teach us how to live rightly in the light of his unchanging nature. There will, of course, be parallels between God's old covenant dealings with Israel and his new covenant dealing with us, the universal church, which is the body of Christ. We shall find many similarities between ourselves and the men and women we meet in the Bible's pages. But we shall come to recognize that we are not the focus of the story, and that we should not read our circumstances or experiences into theirs. This is God's book, and it is about God first before it is our book about our relationship with him. Consecutive biblical exposition seeks to guard and propagate these revelatory distinctives in every generation to the greater glory of God and for the blessing of his people and the rest of his world.  In a wonderful insight into his own ministry priorities and goals, the apostle Paul revealed to the Colossians the nature of the stewardship that God had given to him for the church. It was "to make the word of God fully known, the mystery hidden for ages and generations but now revealed to his saints. To them God chose to make known how great among the Gentiles are the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory" (Col. 1:25-27). This is the contemporary preacher's task in the only valid and authentic apostolic succession - that of the gospel, focused and fulfilled in Christ, who is in the believer now and the guarantee of glory to come. So Paul continues, "Him we proclaim, warning everyone and teaching everyone with all wisdom, that we may present everyone mature in Christ. For this I toil, struggling with all his energy that he powerfully works within me" (vv. 28-29). That is the goal. Those are the resources. This is the cost. As we thank God for a wonderful example of such apostolic ministry at College Church through our brother Kent, let us dedicate ourselves to that kind of prayer and hard work, so that through the agency of the Simeon Trust and others whom the Lord will yet raise up, this kind of ministry will be multiplied across the world in the coming days far beyond all that we might ask, or even imagine, as the Word does the work.
Chapter 2: Written for Our Example: Preaching Old Testament Narratives
Paul House
One of the joys and burdens of expository preaching, as Kent Hughes practices, is that this approach requires preachers to construct sermons from the whole Bible, both Old Testament and New Testament. When my wife, Heather, and I became members of College Church in 2001, Dr. Hughes was preaching through Genesis, and he was doing a marvelous job. More than once in personal conversations he mentioned how hard he worked to know exactly how to present the elements of the Genesis narratives. I think that the struggles of this gifted veteran preacher indicate that Old Testament narrative constitutes one of the more difficult genres for expository preachers to use in their pulpit ministries. This assertion may sound odd at first, since these narratives reveal many compelling characters involved in key moments in Israelite and world history, which is in fact salvation history. But I have found such difficulty to be the case as I have explored the wider world of conservative Christian circles. Indeed, I have found it fairly rare to find preachers proclaiming these portions of Scripture at all, 1  despite the large number of narrative passages in the Old Testament.  There are some fairly legitimate reasons why preachers hesitate to preach from these passages with any regularity. Some preachers may think that there are other passages that are more important for their churches to consider. Also, some expositors may find it hard to derive effective applications from these passages, because the texts themselves do not always divulge how they apply to believers. As a result, some preachers find themselves simply retelling the story or retelling the story and offering simplistic moralistic comparisons between the people in the text and their people. Furthermore, several of the narrative books are quite long, making it difficult to sustain a passage-by-passage series for the amount of time it takes to preach through the entire book. Finally, some of the individual stories in narrative are likewise very lengthy, even when divided into scenes, and current congregations are rarely trained to read and focus on long sections of the Bible.  I believe that there are at least three fundamental systemic problems that must be addressed before preaching from Old Testament narratives becomes more common. First, even many conservative expositors have been trained to wonder if the Old Testament is worth the effort, since it is much easier to "apply the New Testament to hearers' lives." In my opinion, it is important for preachers to consider whether this is the proper way to understand our relationship to the Bible. Second, although conservative expositors believe quite rightly that the Bible is inerrant, they do not always act as if they believe the entire Bible is useful for Christian living. They need to recall some key principles about the Bible's origins and purposes. Third, many expositors are not clear as to how the Old Testament participates in the Bible's grand narrative. They are not sure how to conceive of the Bible as a unity and therefore lack a grasp of the Bible's wholeness.  This essay seeks to address these difficulties by examining our attitude toward the connection between Scripture and life, by offering some key principles concerning the Old Testament's usefulness, and by exploring the Bible's overall narrative structure. No amount of excellent commentaries, published sermons, handbooks, and articles on how to analyze these texts will result in more attention to these largely neglected passages, though such works are needed. Indeed, high quality works of these types have existed for some time. Without a fundamental change of perspective, it is unlikely a larger number of preachers will use the wonderful tools at their disposal for unlocking the riches of Old Testament narrative.
Old Testament Narratives and Application
One of the most repeated and yet ultimately unbiblical notions among Christians is the idea that preaching the Old Testament as God's Word for today must be treated as a particular type of  legitimate  problem to solve. Stated simply, preachers and hearers often act as if the Old Testament has something special to prove before it should be heard as Christian Scripture. Like many other teachers, preachers, and commentators, for years I offered rationales for reading, hearing, and studying the Old Testament based on an unwitting acquiescence to this belief. I did so with the good intention, or so I conceived it, of helping students and parishioners "apply the Bible to their lives." I wanted them to benefit from the Old Testament in ways I had appreciated it in my own life.  After years of trying to explain why the Old Testament matters for believers, I came to two basic conclusions. First, the New Testament writers do not treat the Old Testament as a problem to be solved but rather as God-breathed sacred writing (Scripture) to be obeyed (2 Tim. 3:16; see below). Second, when I incorrectly treated the Old Testament as the problem instead of putting upon my hearers a responsibility to obey the Old Testament, I actually made it harder for my students and parishioners to come to terms with the whole Word of God. Even though many Christians believe that the Old Testament must prove itself relevant before they are ready to consider it, it is unhelpful to these people to condone what is after all an erroneous and ultimately rebellious presupposition. Instead of accepting a common misconception, we are well advised to help people replace their incorrect presupposition with correct ones and then aid them in reading the Bible effectively.  The most important presupposition to give people today is that we, not the Bible, have something to prove. As Christopher Wright has argued, all of us must learn that the Christian life is not a matter of our becoming convinced of the benefits associated with "applying the Bible to our lives." Rather, we must realize and we must preach the opposite. Through the power of the Holy Spirit we must learn and help others learn to "apply our lives to the Bible." God and his Word - not our lives and minds - comprise the horizon of reality and authority. We are required to conform to the Scriptures; they are not required to conform to us. 2
Preachers must see their task as aiding their congregations in the process of applying their lives to the whole Bible. They must lead hearers to ask God in what ways he wishes their lives to matter by obeying his Word. In this way, they can obey God and learn what Paul means when he writes in 1 Corinthians that the Old Testament was written "for our sake" (9:10), "as examples for us" (10:6), and "for our instruction" (10:11). Without this starting point, preachers may be unaware that they are presenting the Word of God in a way that leaves hearers thinking they may pick and choose the parts they consider most valuable, or the parts that a preacher or teacher has redeemed from the ash heap by proving them worthy of consideration.
The Usefulness of Old Testament Narrative
Once the horizon of reality and obedience are fixed, those who preach from Old Testament narrative should keep some basic steadying principles about the Old Testament's accuracy and usefulness in mind. These principles will encourage new preachers to approach any biblical text with the assurance that it is something their congregations need. These principles may help veteran expository preachers avoid capitulating to the temptation to ignore the Old Testament in their preaching program. They might even keep both old and new preachers from shelving expository preaching of narratives for trendier, yet less biblically saturated and thus ultimately less helpful, approaches to preaching these passages.  I derive these principles from Paul's assertions about the Scriptures in 2 Timothy 3:16 because it is a classic statement of how the Bible coheres with the consistency of God's character and testifies to his helpful dealings with his people as revealed in the Bible. I also use principles from the New Testament at this point, because these writers were, like us, Christians seeking to preach and obey God's Word written as found in what we call the Old Testament. The passage is as follows: "All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness."  In this passage Paul states his twofold conviction that the Bible is perfect and pure on the one hand and therefore useful on the other. This conviction is also found in key Old Testament passages (such as Ps. 19:7-14) that summarize the nature of Scripture. Paul's comments to Timothy about the Scriptures comprise a summary statement of how New Testament writers viewed the Old Testament, including its narratives, when they preached from its contents, for Jesus and Peter also agree with Paul's statements about the Scriptures (John 5:39; 2 Pet. 1:20-21).  Paul tells Timothy that "all Scripture is breathed out by God" (2 Tim. 3:16). There is little doubt that by "all Scripture" Paul means at least the whole Old Testament. He may also include at least some of what we know as the New Testament. After all, Peter calls Paul's letters part of "the Scriptures" (2 Pet. 3:16), so Paul may have had a similar opinion of Peter's writing and/or that of other apostles. William Mounce observes that the phrase "breathed out by God" indicates "the origin of every single element of the OT comes from God." 3  D. B. Knox adds that God's being the Bible's source means that the "Holy Scripture, since it is the word of God, is true in respect to all the things that God is saying through it. It will be infallible, that is to say, utterly reliable; it cannot be broken or proved wrong; it must be fulfilled." 4  In other words, the Old Testament is coherent and completely trustworthy, or inerrant, in every aspect of what it teaches because it comes from God, who is completely coherent and trustworthy. 5
This last conclusion means, among other things, that the Old Testament cannot contradict itself. As Jesus says, "Scripture cannot be broken" (John 10:35), by which he means Scripture is not pitted against itself in interpretation. Furthermore, the Old Testament cannot be contradictory to the New Testament, since God's character lies behind both. As Article 7 of the 39 Articles of the Anglican Communion asserts, "The Old Testament is not contrary to the New: for both in the Old and New Testament everlasting life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only mediator between God and Man. Wherefore they are not to be heard, which feign that the old Fathers did look only for transitory promises." The Article then distinguishes between the moral and ceremonial law, noting the Christian's duty to obey the moral law and implying that the ceremonial law has much to teach us as well.  Paul does not stop his exhortation to Timothy with his comments on the Bible's origins, coherence, and truthfulness. He proceeds to address the reasons God gave a revelation that so closely adheres to his own nature. Since the Scriptures are "breathed out by God," they are "profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness." God's perfect Word was given so that God's people could learn to obey him. Mounce writes that the word translated "teaching" (cf. 1 Tim. 1:10) is a technical term in the Pastoral Epistles "for the doctrinal formulation of Scripture (cf. especially 1 Tim. 4:13). It, not myths, is the basis of Timothy's ministry, as Paul emphasizes elsewhere (cf. Rom. 15:4)." 6  Mounce adds, "Scripture is the standard of truth, the pattern of truth (2 Tim. 1:13). Timothy is to guard it (2 Tim. 1:14) by using it to convict error." 7  Thus, "teaching" indicates the totality of what the Bible teaches on all subjects it addresses. This "teaching" constitutes the Bible's definition and application of key themes such as sin, salvation, the people of God, judgment of sin, and the coming of the kingdom of God at the end of world history.  This teaching is profitable for offering "reproof" to the people of God. The Greek word translated as "reproof" ( elegmos ) does not appear elsewhere in the New Testament, though 1 Timothy 5:20 and 2 Timothy 4:2 use cognates. Though it is possible that the term means "the conviction of false doctrine," as Mounce believes, 8  there may be other options related to this definition that are more precise. I. Howard Marshall writes that the term means "getting a person to realize that they have done wrong," and cites the Septuagint translation of Numbers 5:18-22 as evidence for his comment. 9  There  elegmos  appears when the water in the prescribed ritual is defined. Thus, in 5:18-19, the phrase translated "water of bitterness" in the English Standard Version could be translated "water of reproof." The ritual has a clear reproving purpose, so the latter translation is defensible.  Marshall could have added the fact that the Septuagint translation of Leviticus 19:17 includes  elegmos  in its description of how to treat one's neighbor. Moses tells Israel to avoid slander (19:16) and hating a neighbor in one's heart (19:17). Instead, one should reprove a neighbor openly and honestly (19:17) as a way of proving love for that neighbor (19:18). The context of Leviticus 19:16-18 coincides with Paul's context nicely, since both describe how to aid others in walking with God. It seems likely that Paul tells Timothy that the Bible does what Leviticus 19:17 encourages Israel to do: speak to the person in a reasonable and loving manner so that behavior can change, love can shape the relationship, and fellowship can continue. "Teaching," or "doctrine," supports and demands as much.  The Bible's teaching is also profitable "for correction." This is the only appearance of this word in the New Testament. Marshall writes that its basic lexical meaning is "correction, restoration, improvement," and that the flow of the passage from "reproof" to "correction" is a natural progression from the conviction of sin "to the recovery of the sinner to a better life." 10  T. D. Lea adds, "The term . . . suggests that Scripture helps individuals to restore their doctrine or personal practice to a right state before God. Correction is one means God uses in order to restore people to spiritual positions they have forfeited. This emphasis frequently appears in the wilderness experience of Israel (see Deut. 8:2-3, 5)." 11  Thus, when the Bible offers "correction," it is not simply for the purpose of addressing someone's faults to point out wrongdoing. Rather, it is for the purpose of changing behavior in order to restore that person to a proper relationship with God. The Bible both points out error and offers examples of how errors may be expunged and right living before God renewed.  Finally, the Scriptures are profitable for "training in righteousness." The word translated "training,"  paideia,  involves discipline, correction, and instruction for the purpose of educating a person in a path of life. 12  It "means the rule of a good and holy life." 13  As Lea summarizes the matter, "A final use of Scripture is to provide moral training that leads to righteous living. This positive purpose is expressed by a term ( paideia ) that also appears in Ephesians 6:4 ("training"). There it denotes a system of discipline used by a parent to develop a Christian character in a child. Here it describes a system of discipline in Scripture that leads to a holy life-style." 14  The Bible does not simply offer a set of rules to be consulted in every situation, though it does include commands. Instead, it accepts the fact that a set of rules cannot address every situation that might arise in one's lifetime and emphasizes a biblically informed pattern of living that believers embrace and practice. Persons who have learned this principle have embraced the exhortation John Calvin offers at the end of his sermon on 2 Samuel 1:21-27: "In the end, let us learn how to govern ourselves in such a manner that he may rule over us, and have complete mastery and superiority. And may we not only be governed by the written laws, but may we have such obedience to his Word that it may cause us to conform ourselves entirely to it." 15
Paul strongly implies that the Bible divulges a way of life that requires reading, reflection, the reception of teaching, hard thinking, application, and experience. This way of life is deepened in community and by the presence of teachers instructing in both formal and informal settings. These teachers may differ in a variety of ways, but they must all be deeply committed to the fact that the Bible trains them and their pupils in a specific pattern.  As has been implied in the preceding paragraphs, this specific pattern of training is "in righteousness." Mounce notes that here this term "is not only a gift bestowed but also a virtue to be sought (cf. 1 Tim. 6:11; 2 Tim. 2:22), the latter being emphasized in the PE [Pastoral Epistles] owing to their practical emphasis." 16  The context does not indicate that the believer's pattern of life is a training leading to the reception of righteousness by that person's merits but rather the development of a pattern of life in which a believer learns to practice "righteous behavior (cf. Eph. 4:24)." 17  The same source that lies behind the Scriptures empowers the believer to live in such a manner: The Holy Spirit.  When believers hear the Bible preached, they have the opportunity to learn God-breathed patterns of teaching (doctrine). When necessary, this teaching reproves them as one reproves a neighbor one loves (Lev. 19:16-18). Believers who open their minds and lives to reproof then have the chance to have their beliefs and behavior corrected and their relationship with God and God's people restored. Those who make a habit of gaining doctrine, reproof, and correction from the Bible and from biblical preachers learn permanent patterns that they practice in order to maintain righteous ways of living. In short, they have begun to gain what God wishes them to gain from the Bible. The preacher's task is to help hearers arrive at this point regularly and to a growing extent over a lifetime of Christian service. What preachers must never doubt is that all Scripture is part of this development of healthy Christian belief and behavior. They do not have to make the Old Testament part of this process; it is already part of the process by divine inspiration and declaration.
The Narrative Shape of the Old Testament in Apostolic Preaching
Preachers need a sense of the Bible's wholeness if they are to present any portion of the Bible in both its immediate and broader context. Part of this wholeness lies in the Scriptures' common story line. This story line includes key characters, events, and themes that span from creation to new creation, as William Dumbrell has observed. 18  These elements provide the data from which the Bible's theological wholeness comes. Therefore, preachers do not need to shape the Bible into a coherent narrative; they simply need to recognize the narrative the Bible provides for itself.  One way of seeing the Bible's narrative wholeness is to examine the apostolic preaching described in Acts, for these sermons often include a grand narrative that traces the Christian story from Old Testament times until the time the sermon is preached. 19  Such recounting of the great events of salvation history is in continuity with the several similar summaries that appear in every segment of the Old Testament. I have surveyed some of those Old Testament passages elsewhere, so I will not analyze them here. 20  Rather, I will note the ways that Stephen and Paul use this grand narrative to address three very different audiences. My goal is to encourage expository preachers to see that the Bible itself divulges the larger narrative to which shorter narratives contribute and also to encourage them to use narratives to help hearers live the Christian life.
Acts 7:2-54: Stephen's Narrative of Rebellious Israelites
In Acts 6:5 Luke identifies Stephen as one of the men chosen to handle the daily distribution of aid to widows and describes him as "full of faith and the Holy Spirit." In 6:8 Luke adds that Stephen was "full of grace and power" and that he was "doing great wonders and signs among the people." This ministry led to disputes with the temple council (6:9-15). When asked by the high priest to give the council an account of his beliefs (7:1) to answer the accusation brought against him, that he taught that Jesus would destroy the temple (6:14), Stephen offered a message that explained his commitment to Jesus (7:2-53).  This message begins with Abraham (7:2-8), a logical choice since the audience was Jewish, probably dominated by Sadducees and politically motivated clerics, and quite aware of the biblical story line. At least some of this group were therefore likely to have considered the Pentateuch the only binding Scripture, and they were quite interested in Stephen's views on the temple's purpose and future (6:14). Stephen continues by recounting episodes in the lives of the patriarchs and Moses (7:9-44) before turning to the tabernacle and Solomon's temple. This summary of Israel's story is punctuated by comments about negative events, such as the jealousy of Joseph's brothers (7:9), the majority of Israel's rejection of Moses (7:35, 39), and the golden calf incident (7:40-43). Stephen adds his belief that the temple is important, yet not the place where the Creator actually dwells (7:44-50). He then concludes by connecting his hearers to the wicked people of the past, noting that their fathers killed the prophets and they have killed the Messiah, "the Righteous One" (7:51-52). He accuses them of not obeying the law they say was "delivered by angels" (7:53). Of course, his sermon leads to his martyrdom (7:54-60).  In this narrative-driven sermon, Stephen makes several important choices. He does not stray beyond the Scriptures his audience accepts as coming from God. He chooses episodes from Israel's story that address the subject the council set before him, yet in a way that includes examples of the sort of rebellion he believes them guilty of currently. He ends with Jesus but assumes that his listeners know his beliefs about the recent death and resurrection of Jesus. He does not feel the need to include Jesus in Old Testament stories that do not address the Messiah, but he does preach to that point in history, for it is the climax of the story. He conceives of Israel's rebellion and its manifestation in his day as a terrible, yet highly instructive, narrative. He certainly uses this narrative to attempt to teach, reprove, correct, and train his hearers in the ways of Scripture. There is no record of anyone accepting his message, but in an excellent bit of foreshadowing Luke notes that a young man named Saul heard the sermon (7:58).
Acts 13:13-49: Paul's Narrative of God's Message of Salvation
During his first missionary journey, Paul preached in the synagogue at Antioch of Pisidia. His audience consisted of Jews and God-fearers (13:16, 26) who worshiped there regularly, so it is likely he expected from the crowd a fair amount of biblical knowledge. He did not address persons with little or no understanding of the Old Testament, as he did in Lystra (14:8-18) and Athens (17:16-34; see below). Indeed, he spoke in a context in which passages from the Law and Prophets had already been read (13:15). Like Stephen in Acts 7:2-54, he tailored his message to the audience at hand through means of presenting an overarching narrative that included his hearers.  Paul begins by mentioning briefly the patriarchs, the exodus, and Israel's wilderness years (13:17-18). Next, he proceeds to summarize the conquest of Canaan and the era of the judges so that he can reach the point of Israel's request for a king (13:19-21a). Paul then introduces David as the king through whom God gave Israel a Savior, whom he identifies as Jesus (13:21b-23). Interestingly, he includes in his narrative a statement about John the Baptist's testimony to Jesus (13:24-25), which may indicate that some in the congregation had knowledge of John's ministry or had even received "the baptism of John" (Acts 18:25). If so, Paul wants these people to understand that what the Old Testament and John promised had come to pass.  Having set the stage for the major portion of his sermon, Paul proceeds to present Jesus' life and ministry for the purpose of pressing upon the congregation their need to believe the "message of this salvation" (13:26). First, he asserts that the leaders in Jerusalem did not accept Jesus because they did not understand the Scriptures. In an extreme irony, they did not understand the Scriptures, but they "fulfilled them by condemning him" (13:27). Second, Paul claims that though Jesus was not worthy of death, the ones who did not understand the Scriptures asked the Roman official Pilate to crucify him. Pilate obliged, and afterwards Jesus was buried (13:28-29).  Third, Paul proceeds to the irreplaceable core of the Christian message: the resurrection. 21  He proclaims, "But God raised him from the dead, and for many days he appeared to those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people" (13:30-31; see 1 Cor. 15:3-7). The import of this fact is that Paul brings them "the news" (the gospel), the divine proclamation, that God has fulfilled his promise of sending a messiah and raising him from the dead. Paul cites Psalms 2 and 16 to confirm his point (13:32-35). He says Jesus' resurrection makes him the greatest figure in Israel's history, for it places him above David (13:36-37) and Moses (13:39).  Fourth, Paul explains the meaning of the story he has related. Hearers should know that through Jesus, forgiveness of sins is possible (13:38). What "the law of Moses" could not do (because it was not its purpose), Jesus has done. He has removed sin forever (13:38-39). Thus, the congregation must believe (13:38) and not harden its hearts at this message, the very danger the prophet Habakkuk, whom Paul quotes, warned Israel to avoid (13:40-41; Hab. 1:5). Unbelief will lead them to "perish" (13:41), for judgment approaches, just as it did in Habakkuk's day. What makes Paul's news "good news" is that his "news is not only of the judgment but more significantly of salvation in that judgment." 22  Paul's hearers can avoid repeating the negative aspects of the narrative Paul presents. They can participate in a new ending to the story they have heard.  Interestingly, the story Luke tells about Paul telling the biblical story continues in the description of the people's reaction to the message. Apparently many persons believed, or at least wished very much to hear more (13:42-43). So Paul preached the next Sabbath, drawing large crowds (13:44) but also much criticism and opposition. Luke writes, "But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began to contradict what was spoken by Paul, reviling him" (13:45).  Given this response, Paul claims that God's Word had to be proclaimed to Jews first, but the Jews' rejection of the message, which amounted to a repetition of the negative parts of Israelite history, means it is time to take the message to the Gentiles (13:46). God has made the apostles servants of the Suffering Servant, so they must do what he came to do: be "a light for the Gentiles, that [they] may bring salvation to the ends of the earth" (13:47; citing Isa. 49:6). The story of God's salvation of people from sin and judgment must go "to the ends of the earth," and the apostles and their team members are God's means of doing just that. The reaction to Paul's ending of the narrative is threefold: "as many as were appointed to eternal life believed" (13:48), the Word of God spread throughout that region (13:49), and those who did not believe persecuted the apostles, driving them from the area (13:50-51).  There are several important implications of Paul's sermon for today's preachers. First, like Stephen, the apostle Paul conceived of salvation history as a connected series of events that explain what happened in world and Israelite history as depicted in God's Word. Jesus and his apostles and their ministries to Israel and the Gentiles are the latest installment of that story, but these are not unexpected or illegitimate additions to the story, for the Scriptures had already stated that they would minister God's news of redemption from sin and judgment. Second, Paul uses the Scriptures to teach, reprove, correct, and train his hearers in God's ways. He wants them to realize what God has done, believe it, and move forward in the grace of God, which is following Jesus. Third, Paul has no qualms about drawing analogies between his audience and the people described in the Old Testament. He feels very comfortable applying their lives to Scripture. Fourth, Jesus is at the center of the narrative, yet he is not the whole narrative. He is also not inserted into every phase of the narrative. Abraham, Moses, David, and Paul have their parts as well. These other characters and their story are sub-stories within the great story. Not telling their stories impoverishes an understanding of Jesus' story and of the story of final redemption and resurrection that Jesus will complete. Inserting Jesus at the wrong places can lead to a diminishing of what he achieved. Of course, leaving Jesus out would leave an unfinished story that lacks the possibility of the sort of good news Paul offers.
Acts 17:22-31: Paul's Narrative of the Creator and the Resurrection
This brief passage is often used to demonstrate ways to present the gospel to persons who do not have extensive backgrounds in Christianity. This emphasis is appropriate, since Paul speaks to "Epicurean and Stoic philosophers" (17:18) and those they assemble (17:19) to hear his new (to them) teaching. The narrative he shapes for this audience begins at a different place from the one he gives in the synagogue in Acts 13:13-41, but it ends at the same place as the one offered to a more biblically literate audience.  Having perceived their religious, yet idolatrous, context, Paul begins his recounting of the biblical narrative with creation. He identifies "the unknown god" to which the Athenians have erected an altar (17:22-23) as the creator of the universe (17:24). The Creator is a spirit, does not live in a temple, and does not need sacrifices to survive (17:24-25). The Creator made all of humanity from one man, and the Creator rules all people (17:26). All that Paul has said so far coincides with the Old Testament's theology of creation, which in turn fuels the Old Testament's insistence that there is only one living and true God.  Paul then asserts that the import of his creation doctrine is that people should seek and find this Creator, who alone is God (17:27). He claims God is not far away but, rather, quite close, as some of their philosophers and poets have written (17:28). In order to find the Creator, people must reject notions and rituals that connect him to images (17:29). They must turn away from such notions ("repent"), for God has fixed a day of judgment, has chosen a man to be the judge on that day, and has raised that man from the dead to assure people of his intentions (17:30-31).  Paul's message to the Athenians shares some key aspects of the narrative he and Stephen have already preached in Acts and displays one clear difference. Like the other messages, it moves from a beginning point to a clear conclusion. It seeks to move hearers to faith in Jesus. It includes judgment and the resurrection as indispensable components of the Christian message. It begins where the hearers are in relationship to their understanding of the Bible and their need for salvation. It differs in where it begins, for it starts with the audience's belief in creation, asserts the biblical doctrine of creation, and concludes with what will eventually happen to creation. Paul's use of creation here is not a theological innovation, for his hearers in Acts 13 would have agreed with his account of creation theology based on their knowledge of passages like Genesis 1-2, Isaiah 40-48, and Jeremiah 10:1-16.
Conclusion
Expository preachers should take their sense of the Bible's grand narrative from these descriptions of early Christian preaching. Stephen and Paul preached an account of salvation history that encompasses God's good work from creation to final judgment. This work includes the covenants with Israel and the nations that were given to Abraham, Moses, and David. It includes the sending of Jesus the Messiah and his life, death, and resurrection. It includes a coming judgment that all persons must face. Stephen and Paul also stressed the necessity of hearers' displaying a right response to God's message that can be summarized as believing in Jesus, which means believing in all that has been said about Jesus. Their message required those who believed to join the community of those who believed and to live according to that community's standards. 23  This believing response was rooted in their belief in the resurrection and its connection to judgment. 24  Other themes were included in their preaching, but these comprise the core of the biblical narrative.  Preachers should keep this sweeping narrative in mind as they preach through any narrative segment of the Bible. They will then be in a position to do what Stephen and Paul did, which was to apply the lives of their hearers to the biblical narrative in a manner that instructed, reproved, corrected, and trained those who believed their message, which was indeed God's message. They will be prepared to mine the text at hand for life-changing teaching and to set that text in its proper place in the overall biblical story line. They will be prepared to preach about Jesus from any text without inserting Jesus into texts that do not mention him or the messianic promise.
Preaching the Old Testament with Confidence
Embracing the principles I have outlined in this essay will not solve all the expositor's problems related to preaching Old Testament narratives. There will still be hard exegetical work to do. Translations from the Hebrew, as well as fruitful analysis of the passage's genre, structure, theology, and chief means of instructing, reproving, correcting, and training still must be attained from the text. Congregations must still be taught to read, hear, and engage in longer passages of the Bible. Preachers must still read, reflect, and pray. In other words, the sort of struggle Kent Hughes had in preaching Genesis will continue in the lives of careful and caring expositors. There is no easy road in this process.  In this essay I have encouraged preachers to believe that the effort is definitely worth the price they will pay and that to believe these principles is a first step to paying this price. I have asserted that what preachers have in the Old Testament narratives is truly astounding. They have God's promise that what they share with their hearers is breathed out by the Holy Spirit, the same Holy Spirit who convicts hearts and teaches believers. They have the great purpose of being God's instrument for training God's people in the path of faithful living. They have a great narrative that incorporates all human beings and all human history into a story that leads sinners to be saved and believers to sanctification. They have many great examples of smaller narratives that fit into this grand narrative that can help hearers in personal ways. They have a means of seeing how the Bible is a unified literary and theological work. Since such is the case, preachers may have the confidence that as they preach the whole Bible, they will see God do his work in his people through his Word. In short, I think we must not let an unstated lack of faith in God's Word become a stumbling block for preaching all of God's true, helpful Word so that disciples may apply their lives to its large and small narratives.
Chapter 3: The Bible as Literature and Expository Preaching
Leland Ryken
I am persuaded that without knowledge of literature pure theology cannot at all endure, just as heretofore, when letters [the old name for literature] have declined and lain prostrate, theology, too, has wretchedly fallen and lain prostrate; nay, I see that there has never been a great revelation of the Word of God unless He has first prepared the way by the rise and prosperity of languages and letters, as though they were John the Baptists. . . . Certainly it is my desire that there shall be as many poets and rhetoricians as possible, because I see that by these studies, as by no other means, people are wonderfully fitted for the grasping of sacred truth and for handling it skillfully and happily.  - Martin Luther  What does literature have to do with expository preaching?" That is what a preacher asked with incredulity when I told him that I was coauthoring a book on expository preaching. In my mind, it remains a question that should never have been asked. I have also pondered  why  the question arose.  What the question signals is an inadequate understanding of literature and literary analysis. As an extension of that, when I encounter resistance to the idea of the Bible as literature, the objections almost always turn out to be based on incorrect views of what it means that a piece of writing is literature. The procedures of what literary scholars call "explication of the text" ( explication de texte ) and the methodology of an expository sermon are nearly identical. The only difference is that a sermon adds certain elements to a literary explication of a text. As Kent Hughes expressed it to me informally, all biblical exposition is literary analysis.  The burden of the present essay is to assert that although good expository preachers intuitively practice an incipient literary criticism, they could enhance their expository sermons significantly if they would add even a modicum of self-conscious literary analysis to their methodology. By expository preaching I mean preaching in which the central feature is the preacher's choosing a text that is neither too short nor too long to be completely analyzed in a single sermon. Two further features of such preaching are that it (1) keeps its focus on the announced text instead of escaping from it to other material, and (2) interacts with the chosen text in terms of the kind of writing that it is instead of immediately extracting a series of theological propositions from it.  With the foregoing as a point of departure, I will devote the remainder of my discussion to the following four subjects: first, if we are to approach the Bible as literature, we need to understand what it  means  that the Bible is literature. Second, we need to go beyond mere acknowledgement that the Bible is literary to an understanding and practice of what it means to  approach  the Bible as literature. Third, we need to take an honest look at ways in which preachers have generally neglected an important tool of biblical exposition by their indifference to literary analysis of the Bible. Finally, I will outline the advantages that can come through a commitment to correct this current neglect.
The Bible as Literature
Three primary modes of writing converge in the Bible - theological, historical, and literary. Overwhelmingly, theology and history are embodied in literary forms. A crucial hermeneutical principle thus needs to be established right at the outset: meaning is communicated  through form,  starting with the very words of a text but reaching beyond that to considerations of literary genre and style. We cannot properly speak about the theological or moral content of a story or poem (for example) without first interacting with the story or poem.  Literary form exists prior to content in the sense that no content exists apart from the form in which it is embodied. As a result, the first responsibility of a reader or interpreter is to assimilate the form of a discourse. Without the literary form, the content does not even exist.  The concept of literary form needs to be construed very broadly here. Anything having to do with  how  a biblical author has expressed his message constitutes literary form. Further, we can profitably ponder the implications of the statement of fiction writer Flannery O'Connor that storytellers speak " with  character and action, not  about  character and action." 25  What this means is that biblical writers do not simply tell us  about  Abraham's life, the daily routine of a shepherd (Psalm 23), and the indulgent lifestyle of the wealthy of Amos's time (Amos 6:4-6), but  by means of  these things about God, people, and life.
The Idea of "the Bible as Literature"
The idea of the Bible as literature began with the Bible itself. The writers of the Bible refer with technical precision to a whole range of literary genres in which they write - proverb, saying, chronicle, complaint [lament psalm], oracle, apocalypse, parable, song, epistle, and many another.  Furthermore, some of the forms that we find in the Bible correspond to the literary forms current in the authors' surrounding cultures. For example, the Ten Commandments are cast into the form of suzerain treaties that ancient Near Eastern kings imposed on their subjects, and the New Testament epistles, despite unique features, show many affinities to Greek and Roman letters of the same era.  Mainly, though, we can look to the Bible itself to see the extent to which it is a literary book. Virtually every page of the Bible is replete with literary technique, and to possess the individual texts of the Bible fully, we need to read the Bible as literature, just as we need to read it theologically and (in the narrative parts) historically.  With these preliminary principles in place, I will delineate three features that make up the overarching genre that we know as literature. To keep my discussion manageable, I will illustrate all of my generalizations from the story of Cain (Gen. 4:1-16).
The Voice of Human Experience
Literature is identifiable first of all by its subject matter. The subject of literature is human experience, rendered concretely. We can profitably contrast literary writing to expository (informational) writing on this point. The staple of expository discourse is the propositional statement, often tending toward abstraction or generality. The sixth commandment is an example of expository discourse: "You shall not murder" (Ex. 20:13).  Literature, by contrast, is incarnational in the sense that it embodies ideas and meaning in the form of characters, settings, actions, and images. It aims to get a reader to share an experience, not primarily to grasp ideas. The truth that literature imparts is thus partly  truthfulness to human experience,  not simply ideas that are true. The sixth commandment gives us the precept; the story of Cain gives us the example, without using the abstraction "murder" we should note, and without the injunction that we are to refrain from murder.  There is a certain irreducible quality to a literary text in the sense that a propositional summary of it - an idea that we extract from the particulars - never adequately represents the meaning of the text. Flannery O'Connor expressed this in terms that virtually all literary critics would accept: "the whole story is the meaning, because it is an experience, not an abstraction." 26
Because literature is truthful to human experience, it is universal. History and the news tell us what  happened,  whereas literature tells us what  happens  - what is true for all people in all places and times. Of course a text can do both of these, and the Bible does so, but to the extent to which it is literary, a text is filled with recognizable human experience.  The story of Cain, despite the ostensible remoteness of the text from the modern world, contains an abundance of recognizable human experience. Part of what is up-to-date is the  literary  categories that we find in the story: murder story; detective story; crime and punishment. Because the focus of the story is family living, many of the recognizable experiences are domestic in nature: domestic violence; the problem child and the model child; the parents who are disillusioned by the failure of their early hopes for their children; the domineering older sibling; the victimized younger sibling; sibling rivalry. Moral and spiritual experience are also represented: giving in to temptation; envy; harboring a grudge; lack of self-control; moral indifference ("Am I my brother's keeper?"); murder; guilt. An additional cluster consists of attitudes toward authority: defiance; lying toward a (divine) parent; anger at having gotten caught; being forced to submit to the judgment administered by an authority figure. There are also experiences that fall loosely under the rubric of social and psychological experience: self-pity; the hardened criminal without regret; the outcast; the futile attempt to cover up a crime.  We need to hear the voice of authentic human experience from the pulpit, and an incorrect stereotype is that expository preaching does not give it, whereas topical preaching does, especially when couched in the confessional mode. For the expository preacher, the avenue toward giving voice to authentic human experience lies in the literary nature of the Bible. To gain relevance, all a preacher needs to do is explicate the human experiences that are embedded in the literary parts of the Bible.
Literary Genres
The most customary way to define literature is by the external genres (types or kinds of writing) in which its content is expressed. The two main genres in the Bible are narrative and poetry. Numerous categories cluster under each of these. Narrative subtypes, for example, include hero story, gospel, epic, tragedy, comedy (a U-shaped plot with a happy ending), and parable. Specific poetic genres keep multiplying as well: lyric, lament psalm, praise psalm, love poem, nature poem, epithalamion (wedding poem), and many others.  But those are only the tip of the iceberg. In addition to narrative and poetry, we find prophecy, visionary writing, apocalypse, pastoral, encomium, oratory, drama (the book of Job), satire, and epistle. Then if we add more specific forms like travel story, dramatic monologue, doom song, and Christ hymn, the number of literary genres in the Bible readily exceeds one hundred. C. S. Lewis has said famously that "there is a . . . sense in which the Bible, since it is after all literature, cannot properly be read except as literature; and the different parts of it as the different sorts of literature they are." 27
The importance of genre to biblical interpretation is that genres have their own methods of procedure and rules of interpretation. An awareness of genre should program our encounter with a text, alerting us to what we can expect to find. Additionally, considerations of genre should govern the terms in which we interact with a text, so that with narrative, for example, we know that we are on the right track if we pay attention to plot, setting, and character.   There is too much to say about these things in the story of Cain to attempt a full explication. In every verse of the story, setting plays an important role, and this emerges if we use the formula " scene" or "scene of ." Thus the story begins with a sex scene and a birth scene. It is followed by a work scene, a scene of worship, a counseling scene, a judgment scene, a scene of wandering, and so forth. According to verse 7, most profoundly the stage on which the action occurs is the soul of Cain.
The plot of this story of crime and punishment focuses on the character of the criminal Cain. The sequence is as follows: the criminal's family, vocational, and religious background (vv. 1-4a); the motive for the crime (vv. 4b-5); the criminal's counseling history (vv. 6-7); the circumstances of the crime (v. 8); the arrest, interrogation, and sentencing (vv. 9-12); the appeal and modification of the sentence (vv. 13-15); serving the sentence (v. 16). Well-made plots are a seamless progression, and this story illustrates it.  When we turn to characterization, the cast of primary characters is two - God and Cain. Abel is the exemplary human character, but he is an accessory character who occasions the main action but does not actively participate in it. The protagonist of the story - the "first struggler" (literal meaning of  protagonist ) with whom we go through the action - is Cain, and the key to his characterization is that the story is an ever-expanding exposure of his bad actions and attitudes. The authority figure in the story is God, and the chief attributes that we can trace are his benevolence toward Cain and his judgment of the sinner.  A biblical scholar who caught the vision for a literary approach to the Bible has written regarding Bible stories, "A story is a story is a story. It cannot be boiled down to a meaning," that is, adequately treated at the level of theological abstraction. 28  A person listening to an expository sermon on the story of Cain should be aware from start to finish that the text being explicated is a narrative, not a theological treatise. The text exists to be relived in its fullness, not dipped into as a source of proof texts for moral and theological generalizations.
Literary Resources of Language
Literature also uses distinctive resources of language that set it apart from ordinary expository discourse. The most obvious example is poetry, inasmuch as poets speak a language all their own, consisting of images and figures of speech. The most important of the special resources of language that push a text into the category of literature include the following: imagery, metaphor, simile, symbol, allusion, irony, wordplay, hyperbole, apostrophe (direct address to someone or something absent as though present), personification, paradox, and pun.  Some of these linguistic resources are present in the story of Cain. In an evocative metaphor (or personification), sin is pictured as a predatory monster ready to pounce on Cain (v. 7). Cain's rhetorical question, "Am I my brother's keeper?" (v. 9), rises to the level of aphorism, as does Cain's statement, "My punishment is greater than I can bear" (v. 13). The blood of Abel is personified, as is the ground (vv. 10-11). Rhetorical formulas include the curse (v. 11) and the number formula "sevenfold" (v. 15). The story ends with irony and wordplay, inasmuch as the land in which Cain "settled" is Nod, which means "wandering" (v. 16). More generally, the story exploits the resources of suspense, as we are repeatedly led to wonder whether Cain will respond appropriately to the opportunities that God puts before him to conquer his bent toward making wrong choices.  The expository preacher, like the literary critic, approaches a biblical text on the premise that whatever was important enough for the writer to include in a text is important to the expositor as well. If rhetoric, style, and special resources of language leap out at us from virtually every page of the Bible, we need to take note of them and do something with them when expounding the Bible.
Approaching the Bible as Literature
Many Bible expositors would assent to all that I have said about the literary nature of the Bible, only to ignore it when they stand in the pulpit. Mere assent to the idea that the Bible is a literary anthology has not produced a literary approach to the Bible. The payoff  should  have been straightforward; by definition, a literary approach to the Bible is one that does justice to the literary aspects of the Bible as I have outlined them. The following is a brief checklist.  First, literary analysis brings out the universal human experiences embodied in a passage. Literature is the human race's testimony to its own experience. It does not consist primarily of ideas but instead the accurate portrayal of human experience as lived in the world. The test of whether an expository preacher has dealt adequately with a text at this level is simple: if listeners have been led to see their own experiences in the text and its exposition, the expositor has interacted with the subject matter in keeping with its literary nature.  Second, a literary analysis of a text identifies the genre and interacts with the text in terms appropriate to that genre. This means that (for example) with a story, an expositor talks about plot conflict moving to resolution, story patterns such as ordeal or the temptation motif, characterization, and the role of setting in the action. Such interaction does justice to the specificity of a text. It does not reduce every passage to a set of theological propositions, and it avoids making every exposition seem as though the Bible consists of only one type of writing.  Third, interaction with a biblical text has been appropriately literary if the expositor has identified and commented on such linguistic and rhetorical features of the text as patterning, figurative language, and the style in which a biblical author has couched his content. If those aspects of a text were unimportant to an author, he would not have incorporated them into his writing. But inasmuch as the biblical writers did incorporate these features, they are worthy of attention.  Of course preachers need to be relieved of anxieties about the idea of the Bible as literature before they can be expected to endorse literary analysis as part of their expository preaching. Let me allay possible anxieties by asserting the following:   -- As noted above, the idea of the Bible as literature is implicit in the Bible itself and can be inferred from some of the generic names that biblical writers apply to their writings. The idea of the Bible as literature is not a concoction of modernity.   -- Such towering figures from the past as Augustine, Luther, and Calvin did not doubt that the Bible has literary features. To speak of the Bible as literature is to put oneself in good and respectable company.   -- To speak of the Bible as literature need not imply theological liberalism. Among the ranks of those who conduct literary criticism of the Bible, one can find exactly the same range of evangelical orthodoxy and theological liberalism that one finds in biblical scholarship at large. The literary study of the Bible can and should begin where any other kind of biblical study begins - by accepting as true everything that biblical writers say about the Bible.   -- While fictionality is a common characteristic of literature, it is not a necessary feature of it. The literary nature of a text depends on the writer's selectivity and molding of material and the presence of artistry and stylistic excellence, regardless of whether the content is factual history/biography or made up.   -- A literary approach to the Bible need not imply  only  a literary approach, any more than a historical approach implies  only  a concern with history or a theological approach  only  an interest in theology.   -- In regard to the theological approach, we need to remind ourselves that such an approach is no guarantee of accuracy or truthfulness. Scholars taking a theological approach to the Bible have sometimes strayed as far from the truth as some literary and historical scholars have strayed. To theologize is not inherently "safe," as many Christians incorrectly assume. The privileging of theology over other ways of handling the Bible has provided a false and dangerous sense of security.   -- To view the Bible as literature does not by itself impair one's belief in the inspiration of biblical writers by the Holy Spirit. Our beginning premise must be that everything that we find in the Bible came by inspiration and was safeguarded by the Holy Spirit. If, then, we find an abundance of literary forms in the Bible, we should conclude that God inspired those literary forms, reminding ourselves at the same time that there is no content apart from the forms in which it is embodied.
Contemporary Expository Preaching and the Bible as Literature
If we measure contemporary expository preaching by the hermeneutical principles that I have outlined (all of them variations on the main principle of doing justice to the literary characteristics that the Bible actually displays), I would say with regret that the record is one of widespread neglect. It is largely a history of missed opportunities, though not in an absolute sense, of course.  With close attentiveness and a lot of filling in of gaps, a listener with literary sensitivities can often pick up snatches of character analysis and exploration of the dynamics of plot in biblical stories. By supplying some missing terminology, a listener can see that the meanings of images and figurative language have been unpacked in biblical poetry (though attendees at evangelical church services are unlikely to hear sermons preached on the poetic parts of the Bible, which is itself a symptom of inattention to the literary nature of the Bible). But why should it require a person with literary sophistication to pick up the latent clues that a preacher is expounding a literary text in keeping with the kind of text that it is? Attentiveness to the literary dimension of the Bible should be foregrounded in expository sermons.  If we ask how much has been lost by the inattentiveness of many expository preachers to the literary features of the Bible, I believe that the loss has been immense. We are in a situation similar to that of the church in Roger Bacon's day (thirteenth century). Bacon claimed that the church had done a good job of communicating the theological content of the Bible but had failed to make the literal level of the biblical text come alive in people's imaginations.  In an online course on the Bible as literature that I teach for the general public, a recent posting by an enrollee asked this question: "Why do most preachers choose to remain silent about engaging with the Bible as literature?" The answers are multiple.  Most preachers have never been committed to the idea that the Bible is literature. Many of them know at a subsurface level that the Bible is literary, but it has never gained the sovereignty of their minds, and in fact it has not excited enough interest to prompt them to explore what promise a literary approach to the Bible might afford in their preaching.  Furthermore, preachers are the product of their seminary or graduate school education. They handle the Bible as their education taught them. With few exceptions, the teaching they received was deficient in regard to the literary dimension of the Bible. For the most part, seminaries pay lip service to the idea of the Bible as literature. Students may be introduced to literary approaches to the Bible as part of a menu of approaches, but the goal is simply to ensure that students have been exposed to these approaches. It was never the intention of professors that students would actually apply these approaches in a systematic and regular way when they entered the ministry. Lacking models for applying literary methods of analysis to the Bible, preachers have naturally not regarded such analysis as having practical importance to them.  Finally, preachers (again prompted by their education) have assumed that traditional ways of handling the Bible by seminary professors and graduates are all that are necessary. After all, biblical scholars and preachers are the ones to whom lay people have entrusted the task of interpreting the Bible. What need does the guild have to seek input beyond itself?  But the whole premise here is faulty. In any sphere of life, it makes sense to seek the help of experts when undertaking a project. If I intend to build a deck on the back of my house, I am well advised to purchase a book on the subject and perhaps hire the services of a deck builder. If I need to give a theological talk to a Sunday school class, it behooves me to look closely at how theologians deal with their material, and perhaps to interact with a pastor on whether I am expressing the material as a theologian would.  If we ask who is most expert in literary analysis of a work of literature, my answer is that the people who know most about literary analysis are English teachers who teach literature day-in and day-out in high school and college classrooms. Preachers have not sought the help of people who know the most about literary analysis. Literary scholars are rarely given a seat at the table of hermeneutical and homiletic theory and practice.
What Literary Analysis Can Add to Expository Preaching
What, then, can literary analysis add to expository preaching? I would hope that my answers will make the prospect of incorporating a literary approach into expository preaching appealing to expository preachers. As I outline the advantages, it will be apparent that by literary criticism I mean traditional literary criticism, not the bewildering and highly technical critical approaches that have dominated upper-level literary scholarship for the past four decades. I do not envision anything more technical than the methods of analysis that are instilled in any good high school or college literature course.  First, then, a literary approach to a biblical text provides the best possible antidote to a nearly universal tendency of seminary graduates to translate biblical texts into a series of abstract theological propositions. Theologically educated preachers do not see this tendency as a problem because they love theological discourse. Nonetheless, the immediate move toward theological abstraction  is  a problem if the goals are those of expository preaching.  The aim of expository preaching is to unfold a biblical passage - to relive the passage - from beginning to end and in keeping with the kind of writing that it is. Only a tiny percentage of the Bible is couched as theological exposition. There is, indeed, a place for spinning out a series of moral and theological propositions in an expository sermon, but that place is  after  the text has been experienced as a piece of writing and never as a substitute for reliving the text in terms of the kind of writing that it is. A literary approach to a biblical text can serve as a warden to block a common practice of viewing virtually every passage in the Bible primarily as a collection of theological or moral ideas. Many people who value the Bible most highly as a spiritual authority experience the Bible in large part as a repository of proof texts for theological ideas - quite contrary to the actual form in which the Bible comes to us, namely, a literary anthology.  The positive counterpart to this negative function of preventing immediate theological and moral reductionism is that application of the tools of literary analysis to literary texts opens the door to improved precision in identifying what is in a biblical text. For example, if stories are comprised of plot, setting, and characters, interaction with those three elements will yield a better grasp of a biblical story than when a preacher does not speak of the elements of narrative.  Again, if poets speak a language of images and figures of speech, a sermon that refuses to name these literary features and unpack the meanings of the figurative language will in some measure be cutting against the grain. If a satiric passage by definition has one or more objects of attack and a stated or implied norm by which the criticism is conducted, not speaking of these things is a missed opportunity in the quest to make listeners see the passage as it really is in itself. The hermeneutical principle of which I speak is not peripheral but central to expository preaching, namely, doing justice to the specificity of a text.  Literary criticism also offers a methodology for interacting with the Bible that can be taught and passed on to congregants. Hermeneutical methods that dominate in seminary and graduate education are so sophisticated that preachers legitimately despair of passing them on to their parishioners. The result is that most preachers do not even think in terms of educating their listeners into the methods of biblical analysis as they preach their sermons. When preachers stand in the pulpit on Sunday mornings, their whole bent is directed to sharing the  product  of their work in the study during the week. The  process  of analyzing the Bible is not even on preachers' radar screens as something to mention from the pulpit.  This adds up to a missed opportunity of gigantic proportions. One of the byproducts of expository preaching ought to be a congregation adept at handling the Bible inductively. A mere two or three minutes of interspersed tips for interpreting the Bible in every expository sermon would yield spectacular results. After a year, church members would know that plots are based on one or more conflicts that move toward resolution by the end of the story, and that stories need to be broken into a sequence of episodes or scenes, and that the word  metaphor  is based on two Greek words meaning "to carry over," with the result that we need to carry over the meanings of a metaphor from level A (the statement itself) to level B (the actual subject of the passage).  A literary approach to biblical interpretation also offers a foolproof way to keep expository preaching rooted in common human experience and therefore relevant to everyday life. This is true because an axiom of literary criticism is that the subject of literature is human experience portrayed concretely. I recall an occasion when after I had completed conducting a workshop on teaching the Bible, one of my students in the workshop (a preacher) told me that the most important new idea that he would carry away from the workshop was that the Bible embodies human experience. He confided to me that it had never occurred to him that the Bible is a book of human experience.  Many (perhaps most) expository preachers are so captivated by theological abstraction and (even more) by the interlocking story of salvation history that pervades the Bible that the orientation of their sermons is to whisk us away from the everyday world to a world of theological abstraction. When we stare at a biblical text, we should most immediately see aspects of human experience that the author has placed before us, and only at a later stage should we see theological ideas. We should not set these up as rivals, since a complete treatment of a biblical text should include both. But a literary approach can help ensure that we first see the human experiences that have been embodied in a text.  When expository preachers adopt the methods of literary criticism, they at once enlarge the arsenal of terms and analytic tools at their disposal. Most of these terms and tools would, moreover, represent a fresh approach for both preacher and congregation. Stagnation can enter even the best expository preaching. Literary criticism is not a gimmick for innovation; it is a centuries-old way of dealing with literary texts dating all the way back to Aristotle's  Poetics.  The language of plot and characterization and metaphor and irony is in the active vocabulary of anyone who had a bona fide literature course in high school or college, and in any case terms like these cannot be said to be totally unfamiliar to, or beyond the reach of, the ordinary person.  A particular strength of literary criticism is its emphasis on literary wholes and on the unity of texts. A pioneer in the modern Bible-as-literature movement correctly stated that "no principle of literary study is more important than that of grasping clearly a literary work as a single whole." 29  The primary reason that the dean of an international correspondence graduate school asked me to write a hermeneutics course on the Bible as literature (required of all students enrolled at the school) is that in his thinking my literary approach to the Bible does the best job of showing the unity of Bible passages.  A final gift that the literary approach can bequeath to expository preachers is that it opens the door to preaching from the whole span of the Bible. A preacher once shared that although he would often read psalms to people in the hospital, he would avoid preaching from them because he did "not know what to do with them." Mastering the literary genres of the Bible shows anyone "what to do" with Bible passages.  We can profitably pause for a moment longer on this matter of preachers' selection of Bible passages for their sermons. In some evangelical circles, preachers find it hard to conceive of preaching from anything other than the Epistles. As we all know, the Epistles are ostensibly the most idea-laden section of the Bible. There is no good reason why evangelical preachers should gravitate so overwhelmingly to the Epistles for their sermons - and why they should refuse to interact with them as letters when they do. God gave us the entire Bible with the intention that we would use it - in our sermons as well as elsewhere. Accepting a literary approach to the Bible is a way out of a longstanding evangelical fixation with the Epistles.
Why a Literary Approach Should Not be Considered Optional
The incorporation of a literary approach is not simply desirable, as I have argued above, but it is essential. I can make that claim in confidence because once we embrace the hermeneutical principles that undergird expository preaching, literary analysis is automatically included in the repertoire.  The most important of these hermeneutical principles is a commitment to close reading of a biblical text. The moment we embrace close reading, several concomitants at once become operative, as follows:   -- Close reading implies that an expositor does justice to the specificity of a text. It should go without saying, then, that if the text is literary in nature, an expositor cannot deal with the particulars of a text without identifying and interpreting the literary details.   -- Pointing in the same direction, it is an established hermeneutical principle that a piece of writing needs to be analyzed in terms appropriate to the genre in which it is written. After all that has been written about the Bible as literature, it would be logical for preachers to acknowledge the literary nature of the Bible. Therefore, if passages need to be analyzed in keeping with their genre, it is self-evident that a literary passage requires literary analysis.   -- The goal of expository preaching is to relive a text as fully as possible, and ordinarily to do so in a sequential manner from the beginning of the passage to the end. Literary scholars call this explication of a text. Expository preaching on a literary text adds theological analysis and application to ordinary literary explication, but in other ways literary explication and exposition of a text are not just similar - they are identical.   -- Finally, evangelical hermeneutics has championed the idea of authorial intention. The only tenable conclusion is that everything that biblical writers put into their writing is intended for a purpose. If they wrote in literary genres rather than expository ones, and if stylistic and rhetorical techniques spring forth from virtually every page of the Bible, it stands to reason that biblical writers intended that expositors do something with the literary dimension of their writing.  No matter how strong the case is in regard to literary analysis of a text as part of expository preaching, however, little progress can be expected until two fallacies are acknowledged and repudiated. The first fallacy is that biblical scholars and preachers are the only ones who have something to bring to the table in regard to biblical exposition. While preachers would not consciously assent to such a viewpoint, their practice shows it to be largely true. How often are literary critics or their books on interpretation and the Bible given a place in our churches and workshops? The unstated assumption is that all necessary hermeneutical methodology lies with the guild of seminary professors and their graduates.  The second fallacy is that the literary aspects of the Bible are "only" the form in which the content of the Bible is expressed. The prevalent viewpoint in evangelical circles is that the literary dimension of the Bible, if it is acknowledged at all, is regarded as an optional activity to be pursued if we have time or interest to engage in it after we have assimilated the message or content of a biblical passage.  But this practice violates a very obvious principle of communication, namely, that content is communicated  through form.  There can be no message without the form in which it is embodied, starting with language itself but including many additional aspects of form (broadly defined to include everything having to do with  how  an author expresses content). We cannot extract meaning from a literary text in the Bible without first interacting with aspects of literary form.   In short, forms like story, poetry, proverb, and vision (to name just a few) are the forms  through which  biblical content is mediated. If the writing of the Bible is the product of divine inspiration - if it represents what the Holy Spirit prompted the authors to write as they were carried along (2 Pet. 1:21) - then the only possible conclusion is that the literary forms of the Bible have been inspired by God and need to be granted an importance congruent with that inspiration.  In the epigraph that I placed at the head of this essay, Martin Luther makes extravagant claims for the ability of "English major types" (my colloquial epithet) to handle the Bible skillfully. Luther's statement is doubtless at an extreme end of the continuum. But for as long as any of us can remember, professors and graduates of seminaries have been at the opposite extreme on the continuum. They have given scarcely a thought to the possibility that English major types can bring something valuable to the enterprise of expository preaching. The resources for correcting this omission are ready at hand. All that is required is a willingness to take the step.
Chapter 4: Right and Wrong Interpretation of the Bible: Some Suggestions for Pastors and Bible Teachers
Wayne Grudem
Throughout many years of ministry, Kent Hughes has been known as a faithful and accurate interpreter of the Word of God, both in his pulpit ministry week after week at College Church in Wheaton and in his numerous publications. In fact, I would point to Kent as someone whose ministry models the kind of faithful interpretation of Scripture that I will discuss in this essay.  I write as a friend who worked with Kent for many years on the board of the Council for Biblical Manhood and Womanhood, who worked with Kent on the translation team for the English Standard Version, and who still serves with Kent on the board of Crossway Books. From many years of friendship, I am quite sure that Kent would agree with much or all of what I am about to say here. In fact, I suspect that he may have taught many of these things to his pastoral interns over the years! But I offer these comments here in Kent's honor, because I think they represent much of what his life has been about.  My purpose here is to offer some words of advice on right and wrong interpretation of the Bible. I hope these words may help seminary students and pastors and other Bible teachers as they seek to interpret the text rightly and then to teach it week after week to their congregations. Many of the following comments have grown out of twenty-five years of seminary teaching (six years teaching New Testament, then nineteen teaching systematic theology). As I have watched seminary students over the years, they first become excited about all there is to learn about biblical interpretation, then some become discouraged that there is too much to learn, and then a few may even tend to despair, wondering if they can ever know  anything  about the text when so many different opinions have been written about it over the centuries. The amount of information available, and the number of viewpoints on any passage, can become overwhelming unless we keep them in proper perspective.  To keep students from discouragement, I have tended to tell them over the years that the purpose of seminary training is to help them  do better  something  they already do quite well  as mature Christians: understand the meaning of the Bible. That is because I believe God gave us his Word in such a form that ordinary people could, in general, understand it rightly. That is the doctrine of "clarity" of Scripture. "The testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple" (Ps.19:7).  So these comments are intended to help people become better interpreters. I have couched my comments as suggestions that may be helpful for pastors and Bible teachers. They include much of what I tell seminary students about how to interpret the Bible, though I hope that others will be helped by these comments as well.
General Principles for Right Interpretation
1)  Spend your earliest and best time reading the text of the Bible itself.  I'm afraid that too often pastors and scholars can fall into the trap of spending 90 percent of their time reading commentaries  about the text  and then spend only the last 10 percent of their time reading  the text of the Bible itself.  But when that happens, people tend only to see problems and disputed meanings in every phrase rather than seeing the clear and strong message of the text itself. I therefore tell students (only partly in jest) that the three most important rules for interpreting the Bible are: (1) Read it. (2) Read it again. (3) Read it again.  The words of Scripture are the product of the infinitely wise, omniscient mind of God. There is much more depth of meaning in them than any human being will ever be able to understand. That is why I have found, and millions of Christians throughout history have found, that increased depth of understanding comes from repeated reading and rereading of a single passage of Scripture, pondering each word and phrase, sometimes even slowly reading the text aloud. Since this is God's Word, it is especially important that we do this while consciously being in the presence of God, asking him to help us understand his Word rightly, to see connections to other parts of Scripture, and to see proper application to life.  Time and again I have found that the most powerful sections of my own sermons have come from times when God has first spoken deeply to my heart through the words of the Bible itself, and I have been so moved that I have experienced tears of awe and reverence, or tears of sorrow and repentance, or times of great joy and laughter and rejoicing at the greatness of God. Commentaries do not speak to my heart in this way. Now please do not misunderstand me. I own many commentaries (not as many as Kent, however, for I have seen his library!), and I have even written one myself (on 1 Peter). When I get "stuck" and simply can't figure out the meaning of a passage, I will read a number of commentaries and gain helpful insights. And when I have finished spending extensive time with a text of Scripture on its own,  after that  I will read through some commentaries to see if I have missed anything or made any foolish mistakes. But I cannot do that first, or I simply get lost in endless detours and byways that should not be my primary concern.  So I encourage pastors and Bible teachers: spend your earliest and best time with the text of Scripture itself and with a notepad and pen in your hand. For those who know only English, spending time with a good English translation (such as the English Standard Version) will be wonderfully rewarding. But for those who know Hebrew and Greek, spending time in the original text, doing some word studies, and checking the meaning of some words in lexicons will add richness and accuracy and depth at this point.  I remember many years ago when I traveled to Wheaton and had an appointment to meet with Kent Hughes in his office. His secretary let me in a minute or two before Kent arrived, and when I walked in I saw a well-marked Greek New Testament open and propped up in a bookstand on his desk where Kent was preparing his sermon for the following Sunday. Seeing that told me that this was a pastor who still used his Greek text, and who still was serious about feeding his people the solid meat of the Word of God week after week. He spent time with the text of the Bible itself. I think this is what Psalm 1:2 encourages us to do when it talks about the blessed man: "His delight is in the law of the LORD, and on his law he meditates day and night."  2)  The interpretation of Scripture is not a magical or mysterious process, because Scripture was written in the ordinary language of the day.  Sometimes seminary students have a false impression that when they come to seminary they will be given some "secret tools" for getting hidden meaning from the text that other people couldn't find there. But this is not true, because the Bible was written for ordinary people, and it was written in the ordinary language of the people to whom it was first given. That is why Moses could command all the people of Israel, "These words that I command you today shall be on your heart. You shall teach them diligently to your children, and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise" (Deut. 6:6-7).  That means that when we are seeking to understand the Bible, we are not seeking some secret "new revelation" that will give us better insight into the text. Nor are we looking for some secret numerical code in which the Bible has a mysterious message that can be found by counting backwards every seventeenth letter, and if that doesn't work, every eighteenth letter, then if that doesn't work, then programming the computer to count backwards every eighty-sixth letter, or eighty-seventh letter, until some mysterious message about Napoleon suddenly appears! This is simply not the way that God caused Scripture to be written, and not the way he expects his people to read and understand it. Certainly the original readers did not think they had to read it this way.  No, what we are looking for as we read Scripture is  understanding.  We seek to know what the words and the phrases  mean,  and we seek to understand how they relate to the next phrase and the next sentence and the next. We seek to understand the purpose of a sentence in the whole of the paragraph, or the whole of the chapter, or the whole of the book. In all this we are asking God to give us  understanding.  We want to know  why  a sentence means one thing and not another; and we believe that the reasons for a certain meaning will be there in the text if we look for them until we find them.
3)  Every interpreter has only four sources of information about the text.  This is related to the previous point. There are only four kinds of information (as far as I know) that any interpreter can use in understanding the text and in arguing for that understanding in an attempt to persuade others. The four sources of information are these:  a)  The meanings of individual words and sentences.  Of course we need to understand the meanings of words correctly, and then the meanings of the sentences in which they occur. Words can have a range of meanings (that is why a dictionary entry will list several meanings for a word), but that range is not unlimited. In fact, for every word in the original Greek or Hebrew text of the Bible, there was  a recognized range of meanings  that the original speakers shared. If one person didn't know what another person's words meant, the two could not have communicated with each other! I realize that the context can help us decide  among the possible meanings  for a word, but context doesn't give a word an entirely different meaning than it had everywhere else (that is why Greek and Hebrew dictionaries are useful in giving us the range of meanings).   In seeking to understand Greek and Hebrew words, I have found that doing a "word study" (that is, looking at the way a word is used in various verses of the Bible) gives me a much better appreciation of the actual range of meaning of a word, and helps me understand more vividly and accurately the precise meaning of the word and also the kind of contexts in which the word is used.   b)  The place of the statement in its context.  What is the purpose of a verse or a sentence? Is it to support a previous statement? Or is it stating something with which the author is going to disagree? Is it a statement made by someone whom the author will later say was wrong (such as the statements of Job's three friends)?   c)  The overall teaching of Scripture.  Because I believe that the entire Bible is the product not just of human authors but also of God himself, and that "men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit" (2 Pet. 1:21), I also believe that the entire Bible, rightly understood, will be internally consistent. It will not have contradictory teachings. In fact, the psalmist says, "the  sum  of your word is truth" (Ps. 119:160), and the word here translated "sum" (Hebrew  ro'sh ) in this context means something very close to what the word "sum" means in English - it is the result you get when all of God's words are added together. When all of God's words are considered together, they are not contradictory, but they constitute "truth."   Certainly it is a good discipline, in interpreting any text, to seek first to understand it in the immediate context of the book in which it occurs and what we know of that author's situation and viewpoint. But I think it is right for us also to remember that a correct interpretation will not ultimately contradict what other passages of Scripture say. Therefore I may struggle for a time attempting to find out what James means when he writes, "You see that a person is  justified by works  and not by faith alone" (James 2:24), but I am certain that, whatever James means, he cannot be directly contradicting Paul when he writes, "We know that a person is  not justified by works  of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ" (Gal. 2:16). To take another example, I may need to struggle for a time working on the details of Hebrews 6:4-8, trying to understand the meaning of this: "For it is impossible, in the case of those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, and have shared in the Holy Spirit, . . . and then have fallen away, to restore them again to repentance" (Heb. 6:4-6). Does this mean that some people who are truly born again can actually lose their salvation? People come up with different solutions to this question, but two answers that I do not think possible are: (1) Hebrews teaches that people who have been genuinely born again can lose their salvation, and (2) John and Paul and Peter teach that genuine believers cannot lose their faith.   Of course, liberal New Testament scholars have no problem at all saying that different New Testament authors taught contradictory viewpoints of doctrinal questions. In fact, they  expect  this to happen because they think of the Bible as merely a human book, recording the religious experiences and ideas of human beings who lived long ago. But I disagree with that viewpoint, and I do not think that the Bible contains direct contradictions in its teaching. Therefore I must work more carefully at interpreting the individual passages until I find a solution that does not contradict other passages of Scripture.   Of course, my own ideas of "what the rest of the Bible teaches" might at some point be incorrect, and I may need to go back to those other passages and reexamine them to see if I need to change my mind about the teaching of the rest of the Bible. One verse influences our understanding of the whole, and our understanding of the whole influences our understanding of one verse, so there is a back-and-forth thought process as we seek to get it all right. But on many doctrinal matters the teaching of Scripture is so extensive and so clear that I think it very unlikely that we have misunderstood it through the whole history of the church. All this is to say that the overall teaching of Scripture is something that we must keep in mind in order to interpret Scripture rightly.   d)  Some information about the historical and cultural background.  Good commentaries and reference books on archeology and geography and extrabiblical history can be very useful in this regard. Jewish literature after the time of the Old Testament and Christian literature after the time of the New Testament can also be useful and can enrich our understanding of the historical background, the surrounding culture, the precise meanings of some words used in the Bible, and so forth.   However, while this material is  often helpful,  I think  it is seldom necessary  in order to understand the passage correctly, at least in its central meaning. And too much of what I have read about supposed "background information" I have found to be largely speculative or inaccurate. It is important therefore to have some reliable, standard reference works such as the  International Standard Bible Encyclopedia 30  or the  Oxford Classical Dictionary 31  or the  New International Dictionary of the Christian Church. 32  In addition, it is often helpful to look at the primary documents from ancient Jewish and Greek literature (Josephus, Philo, rabbinic literature, Dead Sea Scrolls, apostolic Fathers, etc.) in English translation where that is easily available.   Sometimes this extrabiblical material makes a text much more vivid and forceful. I remember reading about Samson, when he was in Gaza and the men of the city were waiting to ambush him and kill him, that at midnight, "he arose and took hold of the doors of the gate of the city and the two posts, and pulled them up, bar and all, and put them on his shoulders and carried them to the top of the hill that is in front of Hebron" (Judg. 16:3). I knew this was an impressive feat, since the gate of an ancient city was massive and was made as strong as could be to defend against enemy attacks. But I wondered how far he carried the gate. How far was Hebron from Gaza? I looked at a Bible atlas and found that the distance was over thirty miles! When I found out that bit of background information, I understood more clearly why the men of Gaza decided not to mess with Samson.
Summary
So those are the four sources of information:  a) The meanings of individual words and sentences;  b) The place of the statement in its context;  c) The overall teaching of Scripture;  d) Some information about the historical and cultural background.  That's all there is. There isn't some other "secret" arsenal of information that only Bible scholars in dusty libraries have access to. And when we realize this, then the task of interpretation seems more manageable and able to be done with some degree of accuracy and confidence.  4)  Look for reasons rather than mere opinions to give support to an interpretation, and use reasons rather than mere opinions to attempt to persuade others.  Too often I think interpreters have a tendency to count commentaries, and if six commentaries favor interpretation A, while only two commentaries favor interpretation B, they think that A must be the right interpretation. But that is just counting opinions. That is not weighing the reasons for those opinions. Maybe the six commentaries are all based on the work of one respected writer, and maybe that writer got it wrong. (For example, I found that several commentaries on 1 Peter were written with too much dependence on E. G. Selwyn without realizing that he had made a number of mistakes both in information and in judgment.)  Far better is the approach that looks for the  reasons  a commentator gives for his interpretation. Then it is up to us, as interpreters, to decide whether those reasons are persuasive. Perhaps we see things in the text that those commentaries just overlooked. Or perhaps they are based on assumptions that we cannot agree with (such as a liberal assumption that there are contradictions and historical inaccuracies in what the Bible says).  I think that a good pastor or Bible teacher will take the same approach with his congregation. He won't just say, "In my opinion the verse means X," but will rather give the  reasons  for his understanding. He will say something like, "I think the text means X and not Y because this same word occurs three verses earlier and has the same meaning, and because meaning X supports the author's purpose in this chapter, which we see in this other verse." A good Bible teacher will be able to summarize those arguments briefly and clearly and express them in a way that the hearers can understand, so that they can follow the argument in their own English texts as well.
5)  There is only one meaning for each text (though there are many applications).  To take an example we used earlier, either Hebrews 6 means that genuine Christians can lose their salvation, or it doesn't mean that genuine Christians can lose their salvation. It doesn't mean both! This is because (as I mentioned earlier) God's word is truthful and internally consistent in every part. Every time we see Jesus or Paul reasoning from an Old Testament verse and saying something like, "It does not mean A, B, C, but it means D, E, F," we see them appealing to a conviction that a text means one thing and not something else. (See, for example, Matt. 22:32; Acts 2:25-35; Rom. 9:6-8).  The  Westminster Confession of Faith  includes a classic statement of this when it says: The infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture is the Scripture itself: and therefore, when there is a question about the true and full sense of any Scripture ( which is not manifold, but one ), it must be searched and known by other places that speak more clearly ( Westminster Confession of Faith  1.9; italics added).  I admit that the meaning of a passage can be complex and multilayered because of the richness and depth of Scripture. But there is still only one correct meaning.  What is that meaning? It is the meaning that the  original authors  of Scriptures intended. In most cases that is the same as the intent of the  human  author of Scripture, but there are times when the  Divine  Author, who knows the end from the beginning, has more in mind than the human author understands (1 Peter 1:10-12 indicates that was generally true of the Old Testament authors when they were predicting the coming Messiah).  As for multiple applications, there are of course many millions of different situations to which any given Scripture might apply. And we should grow in skill in applying Scripture rightly. But it still has just one meaning at any one point.  6)  Notice the kind of literature in which the verse is found.  The Bible has different kinds of literature. It contains historical narrative, poetry, doctrinal argument, collections of wisdom sayings, prophetic speeches, and visionary or "apocalyptic" literature. Although all the words of Scripture are "breathed out by God and profitable for teaching" (2 Tim. 3:16), we understand it better when we realize that poetic literature often speaks in imagery rather than with literal description and realize that wisdom literature often makes generalizations about things that are usually true with regard to human conduct (without claiming that they are true in every single instance in every person's life), and so forth. Each type of text should be understood according to the kind of literature it is.  But here is a word of caution as well: too often I have found that scholars get carried away with "parallels" to similar kinds of literature outside the Bible. They can end up saying things such as, "This set of laws from Moses is just like the laws found in Hammurabi's law code in ancient Babylon, and therefore the biblical law must be saying the same thing," and then they use Hammurabi as the deciding factor in interpreting the text of the Old Testament. Or a New Testament scholar might say something like, "This set of moral standards in Paul's epistles is just like the 'household codes' in ancient Greek or Roman society, and therefore Paul must be upholding the same moral principles as found in those 'household codes.'" But in both cases the parallels have been overdrawn, because the interpreter has failed to realize that the Bible has both similarities to and differences from other literature of its time. Certainly we would expect the moral standards given by God to be higher and purer than the moral standards of the surrounding cultures.  7)  Notice whether the text approves or disapproves or merely reports a person's actions.  For example, Genesis records a number of events that God does not approve of. Jacob lied to his father, Isaac, in order to get Esau's blessing (Gen. 27:19, 24), but that does not mean it is right to lie. And "Rachel stole her father's household gods" (Gen. 31:19), but that does not mean that God approves of what Rachel did! It reports that Jacob told Esau he would come to him "in Seir" (Gen. 33:14), but the subsequent verses show he had no intention of doing this but went another direction to Succoth (v. 17). Joshua reports that Rahab told a lie to save the Israelite spies (Josh. 2:4-6), but I doubt that the author means to encourage readers to tell lies in difficult situations. (Although Hebrews 11:31 commends Rahab for her faith and for welcoming the spies, and James 2:25 commends her for receiving the spies and sending them out by another way, the Bible nowhere explicitly approves of Rahab's lie, which violates the ninth commandment. Moreover, it is doubtful that the author of Joshua intends us to take the uninstructed moral conduct of a Canaanite prostitute as an example for how to live a morally blameless life.)  The question of whether an action is morally right or wrong, or is approved by God or not, should be determined by the explicit teachings of Scripture regarding moral conduct, not merely by appeal to narrative examples where it is unclear whether God approves of the character's action or not.
8)  Be careful not to generalize specific statements and apply them to fundamentally different situations.  Too often I have heard people in a Bible study take some verse where Jesus is criticizing the Pharisees and make an immediate application to "our evangelical leaders today," thereby implying that many evangelical leaders are, like the Pharisees, hypocrites, or given to excessive pride or greed, or accustomed to placing human traditions above the Word of God, and so forth.  But these easy connections between the Pharisees and modern evangelical leaders fail to make the most important distinction: the Pharisees who opposed Jesus were not born again and did not (by and large) have a genuine personal relationship with God or a genuine spiritual life within. They were unregenerate religious leaders, for Jesus said they were "like whitewashed tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead people's bones and all uncleanness," and he told them, "You also outwardly appear righteous to others, but within you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness" (Matt. 23:27-28). Therefore, anybody who makes a direct parallel between the Pharisees who opposed Jesus and modern evangelical leaders should first be prepared to say that he thinks that these modern evangelical leaders are not genuinely born again, that they are not really Christians at all.  I realize, of course, that we can all take warning from observing the sinful conduct of various people in the Bible, and there are surely appropriate warnings against pride and hypocrisy that we all should take from reading about the Pharisees. But to say that we all should be warned not to become like the Pharisees is far different from assuming that certain ones of us  are already  like the Pharisees. That is generalizing specific statements about certain people and applying them to fundamentally different situations.  A similar case is found in Matthew, where Jesus says, "An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah" (Matt. 16:4). Time and again I have heard this verse quoted (even by some very reputable Bible scholars) as a means of rebuking people for seeking signs and miracles in the work of the church today. But these writers have failed to observe the context of this verse, where we find that Jesus directed this rebuke against "the Pharisees and Sadducees" who came to him, "and to test him they asked him to show them a sign from heaven" (Matt. 16:1). Nowhere did Jesus ever rebuke someone who came to him in genuine need and asked to be healed or asked for some other miracle. Nowhere is there a hint that it was wrong for the early disciples to pray that God would give "signs and wonders" in connection with the proclamation of the gospel (Acts 4:30). So using Matthew 16:4 against genuine believers who sincerely ask God to perform miracles is wrongly applying the text to a fundamentally different situation from that of "evil and adulterous" opponents of Jesus who were simply seeking to test him and find some way to criticize his ministry.
9)  It is possible to do a short or long study of any passage. Do what you can with the time you have, and don't be discouraged about all that you cannot do.  Imagine that you are a young seminary student and need to prepare a short devotional talk on Psalm 1 - with only ten minutes to prepare! I think you could do it. Take two minutes to calm your heart and pray for the Lord's guidance (eight minutes to go). Then take about two minutes to find out something about the structure of the passage and get a brief outline (six to go). Then take two minutes to think about how this psalm will be fulfilled in Christ and then ultimately in the age to come (four to go). Then take the remaining three or four minutes to jot some notes on application. Then give the talk! Life in the ministry includes some situations like that where you have to do the best you can with the time involved.  Please do not misunderstand me: I am not saying that it's a  good idea  to give a devotional talk that you have only spent ten minutes preparing. But I am saying that sometimes unexpected situations come up, and through some emergency that is no fault of your own, your preparation time is taken away, and you still have to give a short talk. I think it's possible. And I say this only to illustrate the point that it is possible to work within the time allowed and still do a reasonably good job of interpreting the text of Scripture for a specific need or circumstance.  Or you could work twenty hours preparing a good sermon for Sunday morning on Psalm 1. Or some scholar could work two hundred or three hundred hours and write an academic article on Psalm 1. Or a PhD student might take an entire year to write a dissertation about Psalm 1 and its place in the book of Psalms. He might eventually publish a commentary on the book of Psalms.  All of these exercises have their place. If we have more time, there is always something more that can be done to give more depth, more certainty, more insight, more accuracy to our interpretation. But it is good to be able to tailor your work to the time you have available for it, and then ask the Lord to bless what you have done.
10)  Pray regularly for the Holy Spirit's help in the whole process of interpreting the Bible.  Even the author of Psalm 119 prayed for help in understanding the Word of God, for he said, "Open my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of your law" (Ps. 119:18). If even he needed to pray for help and understanding, then so do we. In fact, there is a strong moral and spiritual component involved in proper understanding of Scripture. Paul says, "The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him, and  he is not able to understand them  because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Cor. 2:14; compare Heb. 5:14).  This means that regular prayer needs to be part of our interpretative process. In fact, in my own life, time and again, when I have been puzzled about the meaning of a verse, I have stopped and prayed, asking the Lord to help me understand. And time and again, after praying, I have suddenly seen something I had overlooked that was there in the text all along. I wouldn't say that the Holy Spirit  told me  the meaning of the text. Rather, I think the Holy Spirit enabled me to see more information that I had not yet taken into account, information that was already there but that I had overlooked or not understood.  If "solid food is for the mature" (Heb. 5:14), then personal holiness of life and the maintenance of strong personal faith and a vital relationship with the Lord are all important in right interpretation of Scripture. Paul told the Corinthians, "Among the mature we do impart wisdom, although it is not a wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age," (1 Cor. 2:6), but then he told them that he could not give them that kind of wisdom, because of their immaturity: "But I, brothers, could not address you as spiritual people, but as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ. . . . For while there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not of the flesh and behaving only in a human way?" (1 Cor. 3:1-3). Their disobedience became a barrier to proper understanding of the wisdom that Paul would have taught them.
Keeping the "Big Picture" in Mind: Some Observations about the Whole of Scripture
A final comment on right interpretation has to do with keeping the "big picture" in mind. After he had graduated, an excellent seminary student told me that the one thing he missed in his seminary training was a class on "how the whole Bible fits together." He had learned thousands of details, but what was "the big picture"? The classes were all on such specialized topics that no class seemed geared to address that question.  So here are some comments on "the big picture." These are general characteristics of Scripture to keep in mind. Interpreters who understand these "big pictures" will be much better at understanding individual verses.
Big Picture 1
The Bible is a historical document. Therefore, always ask, "What did the author want the original readers to understand by this statement?"
When we read Scripture, we are reading a historical document written at specific times and places long ago. Yes, it does speak to today, but sound interpretation requires that we first think about what the text was doing in its original setting. What did the original (human) author want his original readers to understand?  This approach will help us avoid bizarre errors in interpretation, such as the classic story about the man who prayed for guidance and then opened his Bible and stuck his finger on Matthew 27:5, where it says that Judas "went and hanged himself." Not seeing much benefit in that, he prayed again, then turned over to another gospel and blindly stuck his finger on another verse, only to read Luke 10:37, "You go, and do likewise." Surely the original authors did not intend for people to take that kind of guidance from either statement!  By contrast, asking what the original author intended the original readers to understand will help the interpreter avoid fanciful allegories that improperly interpret the text. For instance, an interpreter who doesn't follow this procedure might find all sorts of fanciful interpretations of the "five smooth stones" that David took to fight Goliath (1 Sam. 17:40). A modern charismatic interpreter, given to allegorizing, might say that these five smooth stones are the fivefold manifestations of the Holy Spirit in Ephesians 4:11. "But no," a Calvinistic interpreter might answer. He would say that it's obvious that the "five smooth stones" represent the famous "five points of Calvinism." Then a third allegorical interpreter, an ethics professor, might say that they were both wrong because David is going forth to war against Goliath, and therefore the "five smooth stones" obviously represent the five sides of the Pentagon building in Washington, DC, and they therefore give support to the "just war" theory!  Unless we first anchor our interpretation in what the original author wanted the original readers to understand, there will be no limit to the variety of such incorrect interpretations that have nothing to do with the actual meaning of the text. What then is the correct meaning of David's "five smooth stones" in 1 Samuel 17:40? The correct meaning is that "the five smooth stones" tell us that David took five smooth stones from the brook when he went to fight Goliath. The meaning is no more, no less than that. How do I know that? Because that's what it would have meant to the original author and the original readers as they read this historical narrative.
Big Picture 2
The original authors wanted the original readers to respond in some way. Therefore always ask, "What application did the original author want the readers to make to their lives?"
Just as we want readers to respond in some way to what we write, so the original authors of Scripture had a  purpose  in what they wrote. They wanted to get a response of some kind from the readers. Perhaps they wanted the readers to believe that certain things were true about God; or perhaps they wanted them to obey God's commands, or fear judgment if they disobeyed, or take courage against their enemies, or treat their neighbors with justice and kindness, and so forth. Perhaps the authors wanted the readers to praise God for his excellent character and his wonderful deeds. Perhaps he wanted the readers to avoid the mistakes of people in the past or look forward to a Messiah who was to come.  If we ask, "What application did the  original  (human) author want the  original  readers to make to their lives?" that will be an excellent first step in avoiding wrong applications and finding proper applications to our lives today as well. For example, before David went out to fight Goliath he said, "The LORD who delivered me from the paw of the lion and the paw of the bear will deliver me from the hand of this Philistine" (1 Sam. 17:37). Here the historical narrative in 1 Samuel tells us  David trusted in the Lord  to give him victory, and that God did give him victory over Goliath. In addition, David refused to wear Saul's armor (1 Sam. 17:38-39) but took the weapons with which he was familiar, and God gave him victory with those (vv. 40, 45-49). Just so we don't miss it, the text emphasizes again and again that David trusted in the Lord and the Lord gave him the victory (see vv. 36-37, 45-47).  It is not hard to see that the  original author  wanted the  original readers  to make application to their lives as well. They should be like David and trust in the Lord to protect them, and to work through the "weapons" and abilities God gives them, and to give them victory in the trials of life. As for application to our lives today, we too should trust in the Lord to protect us and work through the tools and abilities that God has given us, and hope that he will give us victory in the tasks he calls us to. But there are some differences: in the New Testament our "weapons" in the ministry of the gospel are the spiritual weapons of the Word of God and prayer (see 2 Cor. 10:3-4).  Related to this question is another: When we read about historical events in the Bible, we should also ask, what was God showing the original readers through this event? Why did he want it recorded for subsequent generations?
Big Picture 3
The whole Bible is about God! Therefore we should always ask, "What does this text tell us about God?"
With respect to the story of David and Goliath, it would be totally foreign to the whole message of the Bible to take the story of David and Goliath as merely an example of human courage: David had courage and therefore we should have courage as well. This is man-centered moralism that misses the God-centered emphasis of the entire Bible. Rather, the text tells us that David trusted in  God,  and  God  gave him courage, and  God  gave him victory over Goliath. In fact, the emphasis on God's work in this story is repeatedly found in the text itself (see 1 Sam. 16:13; 17:26, 37, 45, 49-51).  There is so much more in the story of David and Goliath than a morality tale of a mere human being who had courage against insurmountable odds. The story tells us (1) that  God  has chosen "a man after his own heart" (1 Sam. 13:14) to be king of Israel, and David is going to replace Saul as that king. (2) It tells us that  God  anointed and protected and empowered David to defeat Goliath, the most powerful enemy of God's people. (3) It tells us that no earthly power could stand against the Lord (note the emphasis on the Goliath's size and armor in 1 Samuel 17:4-7). It was  God  who protected and saved his people. (4) It tells us that David was zealous to defend God's honor (1 Sam. 17:26, 45-46). David trusted in God to the point of putting his own life on the line, and God rewarded David's faithfulness and obedience - obedience even to the point of risking death. (5) It tells us that after the battle, God gave great honor to his anointed king and brought the people of God into a time of great harmony, peace, and blessing under the leadership of King David (see James 1:12 for a parallel in the New Testament).  So this text, like the rest of the Bible, has  an emphasis on God  and his excellent character and his wonderful works. A similar emphasis can be found throughout Scripture, and we will do well not to miss it.
Big Picture 4
The center of the whole Bible is Jesus Christ. The entire Old Testament leads up to him and points to him, and the entire New Testament flows from him. Therefore, we should always ask, "What does this text tells us about the greatness of Christ?"
After Jesus' resurrection, he taught his disciples more fully how the whole Old Testament points to him. We read, "And beginning with Moses and  all the Prophets,  he interpreted to them  in all the Scriptures  the things concerning himself" (Luke 24:27). In this verse, "Moses" means the first five books of the Bible, Genesis to Deuteronomy, and "all the Prophets" most likely refers to the rest of the Bible, the "early" prophets who wrote the historical literature and the "later" writing prophets, who wrote the prophetic books and wrote or assembled the wisdom literature as well. Luke seems to be telling us that Jesus saw "things concerning himself" in "all the Scriptures," that is, in the entire Old Testament.  To return to the story of David and Goliath,  does it tell us anything about the Messiah to come?  Is there any way in which God was preparing his people for the Messiah by teaching them what the Messiah would be like through the lives of various historical figures? Yes, this text tells us much about things yet to come. From the perspective of the fulfillment that comes in the New Testament, we now can realize that a number of things are foreshadowed in the story of David and Goliath. These five points follow closely the five points about what God was doing that I mentioned in the previous section:   -- God is someday going to choose someone yet greater than David, someone who is truly "a man after his own heart" (1 Sam. 13:14), and this coming one will be King of Israel forever (see 2 Sam. 7:12-16; John 12:13).   -- God is going to anoint and protect and empower this coming Messiah, and he will defeat the most powerful enemy of God's people, that is, Satan himself. This was predicted as far back as Genesis 3:15 (see the partial fulfillment in Rom. 16:20) and began to be fulfilled when Jesus came and bound "the strong man" and began to "plunder his house" (Matt. 12:29). This prediction found its culmination in the cross, where God "disarmed the rulers and authorities and put them to open shame, by triumphing over them in him" (Col. 2:15; see Heb. 2:14-15), and it will be more completely fulfilled when Satan is cast into the lake of fire at the final judgment (Rev. 20:10).   -- Just as Goliath was not able to stand before David, so no earthly power will be able to stand against the coming Messiah. He will come in the strength and power of the Lord, and will defeat all his enemies and reign as King of kings and Lord of lords (see Rev. 17:14; 19:16).   -- David's zeal for God's honor reminds us that there is a Messiah coming who will be zealous to defend God's honor. He will trust in God even to the point of laying down his own life. After he is obedient unto death, God will highly exalt him (see Phil. 2:8-11).   -- Just as God brought his people into a time of great peace and harmony after David defeated Goliath, so after the coming Messiah defeats all his enemies, God will empower him to bring his people into a time of great harmony, peace, and blessing under the leadership of Jesus Christ, their eternal king (see Rev. 11:15-17).  Although Jesus in his first coming fulfilled many of these expectations, there will be a yet greater fulfillment at his second coming.  Now it may not be possible to develop all of these points and all of these parallels in any one message. But the Old Testament is filled with many examples of righteous leaders who in their good conduct foreshadowed the greater Messiah yet to come. And, by contrast, the many shortcomings and failures of the leaders (such as Abraham, Moses, and David, all of whom sinned) remind us that Abraham is not the Messiah to come, nor is Moses, nor is David. Someone greater than these is yet to come.  I do not think it is foreign to the text and the flow of all of Scripture to see the Old Testament in this light. It is all leading up to Jesus Christ, and it is all a kind of preparation for him. When we understand that and point it out, we are not imposing something on the text, but we are in fact being faithful to the text as it appears in the larger context of the entire flow of biblical history.
Big Picture 5
All history can be divided into several major "ages" or "epochs" in salvation history. Therefore, we should read every passage of the Bible with a salvation history timeline in our minds and constantly remember where every passage fits on the timeline.
The Bible's perspective on the history of the world is different from the perspective of secular historians of the world. The Bible's focus is not military history or political history or economic history. The Bible's focus is not the history of science or the history of art or the history of the development of various cultures. Rather, the Bible's emphasis is on "salvation history," that is, the study of how God himself was relating to mankind at various periods in history.  So it is good to begin to read the Bible with at least a rudimentary timeline in mind and then to seek to grow in understanding of how God related to his people in a somewhat unique way in each period on that timeline.  Figure 4.1  contains a very simple timeline with which I advise students to begin. It is easy to memorize, it includes only five dates plus the present year, and it helps readers keep the whole Bible in proper historical perspective. (This is a "premillennial" timeline, according to my own convictions. Amillennialists and postmillennialists may adjust the last part as they see fit.)
Figure 4.1: Premillennial Timeline
Old Testament
|Creation ---------|Fall ---------|Abraham (2000 BC) ------|Moses (1440 BC) --------|David (1000BC) -----|Exile (586 BC)-----------|  New Testament
|Christ 30 AD|Church Age ---------|(2007) -------------  Second Coming
|New Heavens/ New Earth-----------------  Now, on that timeline, the old covenant, or the Mosaic covenant, begins with Moses and continues until the death of Christ. Then the new covenant age begins, and the Holy Spirit is poured out in a new fullness and new power that is appropriate to the new covenant on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2).  Such a timeline provides a great help in keeping many interpretation questions in right perspective. Why don't we follow the dietary laws given in the Old Testament? Why can we eat ham and bacon, contrary to Leviticus 11:7, which says "the pig" is one of the unclean animals that should not be eaten? It is because we are no longer under the Mosaic covenant or the old covenant, and so we do not need to be subject to those dietary laws that were particular to that covenant.  But what shall we say then about Genesis 9:6, "whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed, for God made man in his own image"? Many have argued (and I think rightly) that this provides a fundamental basis for human government to inflict punishments up to and including capital punishment on people who do evil. But is this applicable today, or is it just part of the Old Testament that we no longer need to follow?  I think it is applicable today because it is not part of the Mosaic covenant that was given on Mount Sinai in Exodus 20. These commands to Noah in Genesis 9 are commands that seem to apply to the entire human race that descended from Noah and his wife and children. When this salvation history timeline is in my mind, it helps me to understand that this command is not part of the temporary provisions that were only for the Jewish people in the time of the Mosaic covenant.  But what about the moral commands in the New Testament? What about, "Therefore, having put away falsehood, let each one of you speak the truth with his neighbor" (Eph. 4:25)? Is this a command that we need to follow today, or is it just something that was written 2000 years ago that belongs to another place and another time? Here the salvation-history timeline shows me that the "church age" began in A.D. 30 when the Holy Spirit was poured out at Pentecost, and the "church age" continues until the time Christ returns.  This means that  we are at the same point in salvation history  as were the people in the early church. In terms of the way God acts with people over time, we are closer to Paul's readers in Ephesus in the first century than they were to the Jewish people in Jesus' ministry just a few years earlier, because those people were still under the old covenant. Therefore, these moral commands such as Ephesians 4:25 should be seen as applying directly to us and requiring our obedience as well.  Now the situation is a bit more complex than that. I am not saying that nothing from Exodus 20 to Malachi has any value for us! "All Scripture" is "profitable for teaching" and "for training in righteousness" (see 2 Tim. 3:16), so even the moral standards in the Mosaic covenant can be helpful to us in letting us know, in general, about the kinds of actions that God approves of and the kind of actions that displease him. That is a more complex subject than I can treat here. But the point remains that the salvation history timeline helps us keep the big picture of the flow of biblical history in our minds and helps significantly in the task of right interpretation.
Big Picture 6
Themes: Because the Bible is a unity (it has one divine Author though many human authors), there are many themes that develop and grow from Genesis to Revelation. Therefore, for each significant element in any text, it is helpful to ask, (a) Where did this theme start in the Bible? (b) How did this theme develop through the Bible? and (c) Where is this theme going to end in the Bible?
There are actually hundreds of themes that flow through the tapestry of biblical history like threads that appear again and again. It is rewarding to trace these themes from Genesis to Revelation and see how they develop, and I have found that when this perspective on a text is included in a Bible study, it encourages people's hearts because they can see repeatedly how the entire Bible fits together and forms a consistent pattern in which God has been working through all history to bring about his plans for his glory and for the good of his people.  For example, the story of the Wise Men (the Magi) coming to visit baby Jesus is a familiar one to many people (see Matt. 2:1-12). This is not an isolated event in the Bible, however, but picks up on a number of themes that were present in the Old Testament and will be fulfilled in the age to come. For example, these Wise Men bring gifts from the wealth of the nations to offer in worship to the future King of Israel. These gifts are part of the abundant resources that God has put in the earth for us to develop and use for his glory (see Gen. 1:28, "be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it"). All of the wealth that is found in the earth was created by God, and it ultimately belongs to him (see Hag. 2:8: "the silver is mine, and the gold is mine, declares the LORD of hosts"), and so these Wise Men who bring gifts to the Lord are only offering back what belongs to him, and he is worthy to receive all honor and glory from it.  In fact, the Old Testament historical narrative foreshadowed a time when the wealth of the nations would be brought to the king of Israel who reigns in Jerusalem, as happened during the glorious period of Solomon's kingdom (see 2 Chron. 9:22-23). And now when the Magi come to bring their gifts to Jesus, they are simply the first of the leaders of the nations who will ultimately come and bow before Jesus, who will reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. They foreshadow all the rulers of the world bowing before their true King.  In the future, this theme of the wealth of the nations flowing to Jerusalem in the worship of God will be fulfilled in the New Jerusalem, for we read, "By its light will the nations walk, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory into it" (Rev. 21:24). All the glory and wealth of the earth will be devoted to the worship of the King, and when the Wise Men open their treasures and present them to Jesus, it is a foreshadowing of that continual offering in the Jerusalem that is to come.  These Wise Men are also Gentiles, not from Israel but from another nation. But God had predicted as early as Genesis 12 that in Abraham (and, by implication, in his descendants), "all the families of the earth shall be blessed" (Gen.12:3). There are various historical events that anticipated this throughout the history of the Old Testament, as when Gentiles such as Rahab and Ruth became part of God's people. But when we come to the New Testament, these "wise men from the east" (Matt. 2:1) are the first of a long stream of Gentiles who will become part of God's people and worship the Lord Jesus Christ.  This theme finds further development when Jesus commands his disciples to "make disciples of all nations" (Matt. 28:19), and to be his witnesses "in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth" (Acts 1:8). It finds further development when the Gentiles who were not God's people, who were "alienated from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the covenant of promise," who had "no hope" and were "without God in the world" (Eph. 2:12), have become part of the church and become "fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God" (Eph. 2:19).  But the visit of the (Gentile) Wise Men to baby Jesus finds even greater fulfillment in the age to come when John's vision shows that around God's throne is "a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb . . . crying out with a loud voice, 'Salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!'" (Rev. 7:9-10). All nations will join in the worship of Jesus Christ, and the "wise men from the east" are the forerunners of that wonderful theme in Scripture.  If we keep this "big picture" of developing themes in mind in our interpretation, it will help our people understand the Bible not as a series of isolated verses, but as a unified whole that develops as an outworking of God's eternal and wise plans.
Conclusion
No doubt much more can be said about how to interpret the Bible rightly. But I hope that these brief comments might serve as a help and encouragement to many younger seminary students, pastors, and Bible teachers so that they, in imitation of the faithful ministry of Kent Hughes over so many years, might be wise and faithful interpreters of the biblical text, so that they might strengthen the faith and knowledge of their hearers, and so that they might bring glory to God in all that they teach from his Word throughout all their days.
Chapter 5: Rightly Dividing the Word of Truth: A Study Method for Faithful Preaching
John MacArthur
The apostle Paul was about to die. Incarcerated in one of Rome's most dreadful dungeons, the faithful apostle knew that his execution was imminent. "I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the time of my departure has come," he wrote to Timothy in his final letter. From an earthly standpoint, Paul's situation was bleak. His coworker Demas had betrayed him; others had abandoned him; he was cold and forsaken in prison. He had been alone at his trial, falsely accused of insurrection by his enemies, and subsequently sentenced to death.  But the apostle was not disheartened. "The Lord stood by me and strengthened me," he wrote. In the face of death, Paul was triumphant: "The Lord will rescue me from every evil deed and bring me safely into his heavenly kingdom."  Faced with the abandonment of his friends, the accusations of his enemies, and the anguish of an impending death sentence, Paul remained unflappable. From an earthly perspective, it seemed as though his life would end in failure. But Paul knew differently: "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me on that Day."  His life was not one of popularity, prosperity, prestige, or social power. It had not been successful by the usual measures of earthly success.  But he had been faithful.  And from God's perspective,  faithfulness is success.  He could look forward to death with confident expectation because he knew the Savior was waiting for him. After a life of faithfulness, he could rightly anticipate hearing the Lord say, "Well done."
The Call to Expository Faithfulness
Significantly, it is in this context that Paul charged Timothy, his son in the faith, with this straightforward command: "Preach the Word!" Earlier in the letter, the apostle had similarly exhorted his apprentice, "Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth" (2 Tim. 2:15).  As a workman Paul was not ashamed, because he had been faithful to his ministry. First and foremost this meant that he had been faithful to the  message  God had given him (cf. Titus 1:3). He had  kept the faith,  guarding "that which was entrusted to him" (cf. 1 Tim. 6:20). Now he was exhorting Timothy to do the same.  The church was not yet one hundred years old. Yet there were already plenty of lazy, unfaithful, hypocritical preachers to be found. Some were in it for the money (1 Tim. 6:3-10), others for the popularity (2 Tim. 4:3-4). As a result, the truth was being watered-down, twisted, and forsaken. In their pursuit of worldly success, these false teachers continually demonstrated their spiritual unfaithfulness.  Timothy was to be different. He was to handle the Word with precision, from pure motives, for the glory of his Lord. To restate Paul's words, he was to present himself to God as an unashamed worker who interpreted the Word of truth accurately.  Paul's charge to Timothy rings as true today as it did in the first century. Those ministers who long for true success, meaning the Lord's approval, must work hard to handle his Word with precision. They must give maximum effort in the study and imparting of God's truth - so that their sermons will present the Word of the Lord as accurately, articulately, and authentically as possible.  The aim of their ministry will be to present themselves to God as those who are approved. Their congregation may number in the thousands. Their messages may air on radio and television. Their books may top bestseller lists. But unless their preaching is approved by God, they are failures in the only sense that matters. True success is faithfulness, not popularity. And faithfulness in the pulpit demands diligence in the study.  Those who are lazy in their study, undisciplined in preparation, and careless in proclamation will one day be ashamed. But not faithful workmen. Like Paul, they will one day stand with joyful confidence before their gracious Master.
The Mark of a Faithful Teacher
The faithful workman must  divide  the word of truth  rightly.  The Greek term Paul used literally means "to cut straight." It referred to a craftsman cutting a straight line, a mason setting a straight line of bricks, a farmer plowing a straight furrow, or a workman building a straight road. Metaphorically, it was used of carefully performing any task. Because he was a tentmaker by trade (Acts 18:3), Paul could have had in mind the careful, straight cutting and sewing of the many pieces of leather or cloth necessary to make a tent.  The careful exegete and expositor of God's word of truth must be meticulous in the way he interprets and pieces together the many individual truths found in Scripture. His love and reverence for the Author of Scripture demands it. No faithful ambassador wishes to misrepresent the wishes of his King.  Thankfully, the message of the gospel is abundantly clear in God's Word. The student of Scripture need not fear that its message is unknowable. Rather, he can rejoice in knowing that God revealed himself and his plan of salvation in a way that men can understand. Not only does the Scripture repeatedly claim that God revealed what is written within its pages (over 2,000 times in fact), it also describes itself as that which gives light (Ps. 119:105; 2 Pet. 1:19a), is profitable (2 Tim. 3:16-17), explains salvation (2 Tim. 3:15b), addresses common people (cf. Deut. 6:4; Mark 12:37; Eph. 1:1; 1 Cor. 1:2), can be understood by children (Deut. 6:6-7; Eph. 6:4; 2 Tim. 3:14-15), and should be used to test the validity of religious ideas (Acts 17:11; cf. 2 Cor. 10:5; 1 Thess. 5:21-22). It is the truth (John 17:17) that sets men free (John 8:31-36). Thus, to deny the clarity of Scripture is to call into question not only the Bible's own self-claims, but also God's ability to communicate clearly.  It is because "the words of Scripture are objectively God's revelation [that] one person can point to the content of the Bible in seeking to demonstrate to another what the correct understanding is." 33  Moreover, because God's revelation is clear:  Scripture can be and is read with profit, with appreciation and with transformative results. It is open and transparent to earnest readers; it is intelligible and comprehensible to attentive readers. Scripture itself is coherent and obvious. It is direct and unambiguous as written; what is written is sufficient. Scripture's concern or focal point is readily presented as the redemptive story of God. It displays a progressively more specific identification of that story, culminating in the gospel of Jesus Christ. All this is to say: Scripture is clear about what it is about. 34
Because God has revealed himself in an understandable, clear way, in keeping with the normal means of human language and communication, the student of Scripture can rightly interpret God's message in the  normal  sense in which human language and communication is interpreted. Whether preaching poetry, prophecy, or Paul's epistles, the student of Scripture is correct if he approaches Scripture with the confidence that God revealed it clearly, and he did so using the normal features of language.  But the clarity of Scripture does not mean that diligent study is unnecessary or unwarranted. In fact, just the opposite is true. Rightly dividing the Word of truth demands great effort. This is true for several reasons. First, because its author is God (2 Pet. 1:21), the message of Scripture is as infinitely profound as it is simple and straightforward. As Thomas Scott explained, "The things that are absolutely necessary to salvation, are few, simple, and obvious to the meanest capacity, provided it be attended by a humble teachable disposition: but the most learned, acute, and diligent student cannot, in the longest life, obtain an entire knowledge of this one volume." 35  Thus, diligent study is needed to draw out the deep truths of God's Word.  Second, because it was originally written many years ago in very different contexts, today's exegete has to work hard to bridge the gaps of language, culture, geography, and history. He must also do his best to understand the flow of the argument, as it would have been understood by its original readers, and as it would have been intended by its original human author. Few ills have done more damage to the contemporary church than the proliferation of sermons that base misguided application on misinterpreted or spiritualized texts. The faithful workman will be careful to keep context in view.  Third, because error is so plentiful in the church today, the diligent expositor must approach the text carefully, testing all things to see whether or not they measure up to the truth (cf. Acts 17:11; 1 Thess. 5:21-22; Jude 3-4). Doctrinal error is an eternally serious matter, and no faithful minister would ever knowingly invite it into his ministry. Sound doctrine, on the other hand, is to be guarded and taught (2 Tim. 1:14). The faithful workman, then, studies diligently, "holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able, by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convict those who contradict" (Titus 1:9 NKJV).  Since nothing is as important as the Word, no energy expended by anyone in any field should surpass the effort of an expositor seeking to "rightly divide the Word." Yet this is too seldom the case. As Jay Adams correctly observes:  I have had the opportunity to hear much preaching over the last few years, some very good, some mediocre, most very bad. What is the problem with preaching? There is no  one  problem, of course. . . . But if there is one thing that stands out most, perhaps it is the problem I mention today.   What I am about to say may not strike you as being as specific as other things I have written, yet I believe it is at the bottom of a number of other difficulties. My point is that good preaching demands hard work. From listening to sermons and from talking to hundreds of preachers about preaching, I am convinced that the basic reason for poor preaching is the failure to spend adequate time and energy in preparation. Many preachers - perhaps most - simply don't work long enough on their sermons. 36
If one truly believes God inspired every word of Scripture, how can he justify treating it with any degree of triteness or superficiality? And if the Word is the sword of the Spirit (Eph. 6:17; Heb. 4:12) and the power of God for salvation (Rom. 1:16) and sanctification (John 17:17), how can anyone invest more trust in stories and clever insights than in Scripture? A man once said to the Puritan preacher Richard Rogers, "Mr. Rogers, I like you and your company very well, only you are too precise." "Oh sir," replied Rogers, "I serve a precise God." 37  And God has not lowered his standard of precision to accommodate a dumbed-down society.
The Basics of Bible Study
At the foundational level, there are three familiar basics for Bible study: observation, interpretation, and application. The exegete must familiarize himself with the text (observation), identify the intended meaning of the text (interpretation), and determine how to appropriately respond (application).
Observation
Observation is the initial step in Bible study. The interpreter must avoid jumping to conclusions before first familiarizing himself with the content and context of the passage. He must resist the temptation to plunge immediately into commentaries and other study helps before living in the passage himself. Nothing can replace firsthand observation. And thus he should devote extended time to this crucial practice. Robert A. Traina defines observation as "essentially  awareness  . . . the general function of observation is to enable one to become  saturated  with the particulars of a passage so that one is thoroughly conscious of their existence and of the need for their explanation. Observation is the means by which the data of a passage becomes part of the mentality of the student. It supplies the raw materials upon which the mind may operate in the interpretive process." 38
It includes a broad awareness of the terms, structure, and literary form of the passage. It should be careful, systematic, and persistent. Martin Luther likened his Bible study to gathering apples: "First I shake the whole tree, that the ripest may fall. Then I climb the tree and shake each limb, and then each branch and then each twig, and then I look under each leaf." 39
Observation begins by reading and rereading the passage until the exegete is saturated with its content; it allows the Bible student to answer the questions  Who? What? Where? When? Why?  and  How?  The interpreter should also note the significance of certain textual markers, such as verbs, connecting words, repeated terms, comparisons and contrasts, commands and exhortations, or words and phrases the biblical author has used elsewhere. By observing what the text itself says, the preacher has an objective basis upon which to propositionally state the truths of God's Word - rather than just subjectively asserting that "this is what  such and such  means to me."  After making general observations regarding the structure and flow of the passage, the exegete should identify key words and phrases within the passage - noting their lexical and syntactical relationships to one another. Since God chose to communicate using human language, the preacher can best understand the meaning of a passage by identifying the key words and phrases therein.  William D. Barrick notes seven aspects involved in this identification process:  1) Ask, "To what is each word, phrase, clause, sentence, and paragraph related? In what way? For what purpose?"  2) Ask, "Where is the prominence or emphasis?" Pay attention to word order and the employment of emphatic words.  3) Determine what idioms are being employed in the passage.  4) Determine the literary form (genre) of the passage. Is the text narrative, poetry, prophecy, or something else?  5) Determine what literary devices (chiasms, repetition, inclusion, assonance, parallelism, etc.) are being employed.  6) Perform a word study for each key word in the text. Keep in mind that many words have no great "golden nugget" of expositional truth outside of their usage within the text's proposition.  7) State the argument and/or the development of the theme succinctly and in your own words. 40
Interpretation
As the exegete familiarizes himself with a given text, he should always keep in mind one simple question: "What does this mean?" It is irresponsible to read the text and jump directly to some application; the essential issue for the expositor is to discern the meaning, so that no application is illegitimate.  After this exercise, the exegete should turn to the available resources, such as commentaries, lexicons, Bible dictionaries, theologies, histories, and concordances. In this process new observations may surface, and most of the exegete's original questions should be answered and observations expanded. Granted, the interpreter should emphasize research on interpretation in conservative commentaries, while recognizing that liberal commentaries may provide insight related to technical matters in regard to the original language and its usage.
GAPS TO BRIDGE
As briefly noted earlier, there are four gaps that the contemporary student of Scripture must bridge in order to rightly understand what it means. First, the expositor must be equipped to bridge  the language gap.  Since the Bible was originally written in Greek, Hebrew, and Aramaic, the meaning of a word or phrase in the original language is often the key to correctly interpreting a passage of Scripture. Even if a pastor is not fluent in the biblical languages, he should draw from trustworthy sources to aid him in interacting with the original text.  Second, the preacher must overcome  the culture gap.  The Bible must first be viewed in the context of the time and place in which it was written. For instance, without an understanding of first-century Jewish culture, it is difficult to understand the Gospels. Similarly, Acts and the Epistles must be read in light of the Greek and Roman cultures and history.  A third gap that needs to be closed is  the geography gap.  Biblical geography makes the Bible come alive. A good Bible atlas is an invaluable reference tool that can help you comprehend the geography of the Holy Land. Of course, nothing does this more than visiting the land firsthand. But even those who have never been to Israel should do their best to familiarize themselves with it as much as possible.  Finally, students of Scripture must also bridge  the history gap.  Unlike the scriptures of most other world religions, the Bible contains the records of actual historical persons and events. An understanding of Bible history will help the expositor place the people and events in it in their proper historical perspective. A good Bible dictionary or Bible encyclopedia is useful here, as are basic historical studies.
PRINCIPLES TO UNDERSTAND
In addition to the gaps that must be bridged, exegetes should allow four principles to guide their biblical interpretation: literal, historical, grammatical, and syntactical. These principles have already been briefly mentioned. But they bear reiterating here since they are absolutely foundational to the exegete's task.  The literal principle  asserts that Scripture should be understood in its normal and natural sense. This is not to say that Scripture contains no figures of speech or symbols. Certainly it does, and they should be interpreted as such, in keeping with the normal rules of language. The faithful interpreter must allow it to speak for itself, without inventing allegorical, spiritualized, or fanciful interpretations.  The historical principle  compels the student of Scripture to interpret God's Word in its ancient context. As those who will explain God's truth to a current generation, expositors must first ask what the text meant to the people to whom it was originally written. In this way the interpreter can develop a proper contextual understanding of the original intent of the passage.  The grammatical principle  requires that exegetes understand the basic grammatical structure of each sentence in the original language. What are the action and the tense of the main verb? To whom do the pronouns refer? How do the various elements of the sentence relate to one another? Often by asking some simple questions like those, along with diagramming the sentence, the meaning of the text quickly becomes clear.  The syntactical principle  is what the Reformers called the  analogia scriptura.  It means that the Bible cannot contradict itself, based on the fact that its Author cannot contradict himself. If the student arrives at an interpretation of a passage that contradicts or opposes a truth taught elsewhere in the Scriptures, the student's interpretation cannot be correct. The right interpretation will always be consistent with the rest of God's revealed truth.
Application
Having read and interpreted the passage, the expositor should have a basic understanding of what it means by what it says. But examining the Scriptures does not stop there. The exegete's ultimate goal is to release the meaning of the Word so as to convict and encourage his own heart, enabling him to grow spiritually by personal application.  From the expositor's personal application flows corporate application. Having embraced the truth in his own heart, the expositor is now ready to preach it to his congregation. In general, it is usually best to emphasize the meaning of the text, then the theological truth it teaches with general application, allowing the Holy Spirit to fill in the specifics for individuals. Though there is only one meaning in each text, there are many applications. The specific nature of those applications depends on the individual circumstances of each member of the congregation.  Application answers the question, "How does this text impact me?" The following questions will help apply the truths discovered in Bible study: 41
1) Are there  examples  to follow?  2) Are there  commands  to obey?  3) Are there  errors  to avoid?  4) Are there  sins  to forsake?  5) Are there  promises  to claim?  6) Are there  new thoughts  about God?  7) Are there  truths or doctrines  to further explore?  8) Are there  convictions  to live by?  Meditation is also an important part of the application process, since God's people are called to think upon his truth and its implication in their own lives. Meditation entails focusing the mind on one subject, involving reason, imagination, and emotions. It is a natural overflow of the discovery process in Bible study. Concentrated meditation on the truths of God's Word weaves those truths into the fabric of life. Perhaps Paul had this meditative process in view when he told Timothy to be "constantly nourished on the words of the faith and of the sound doctrine" (1 Tim. 4:6 NASB).  Careful Bible study skills are the foundation upon which all good expository sermons are built. The expository preacher is, by definition, a skilled handler of Scripture. He interprets it accurately, applies it personally, and then proclaims it to his congregation so that they can understand and act upon God's Word, as well as instruct others with what they have learned.
A Personal Word on the Study Process
Every expositor should have a careful and deliberate plan for putting these principles to work routinely in preparation. Such will increase both confidence in his study and consistency in his preaching. The following method is the one I usually follow in my own study. It is included here in the hope that it will be helpful to others in their own exegetical preparation. 42
Read the Book
Because I generally preach through entire books of the New Testament, I always begin by reading the whole book. It is imperative for the expositor to be familiar with the overall message and flow of the book before he begins preaching any passages from it. As I have grown in my own preaching ministry, I have come to realize how important this step is. When I was less experienced, I sometimes found myself assuming an interpretation was correct because I lacked familiarity with all that would come later in the book, leading to serious difficulties later. For example, in 1 Thessalonians, God's eschatological wrath is mentioned in 1:10 and again in 5:9. The expositor should make sure that his interpretation of wrath in both of those passages is consistent.  Context is the most important hermeneutical principle. By reading and familiarizing himself with the entire book, the expositor can relate each passage to the overall context of the book. Putting together a general outline of the book and identifying key verses is also helpful in grasping the overall flow.  At this point I also read the introductory sections in several good commentaries. Through this I become familiar with the author of the book, the addressees, the book's theme or purpose, the date of its writing, and other important background material. General introductions for New Testament books along with Bible encyclopedias are also useful sources for finding background material.
Read the Passage
I read whatever passage I am working through repeatedly in my English Bible until it is pretty well fixed in my memory. I try to do that early in my preparation process so I will have plenty of time to meditate on it before I begin my exegesis. Once I begin concentrating on my sermon text, it dominates my thinking, conversation, and reading during my time of preparation. This is a foundational part of becoming familiar with the text. I rarely consciously memorize Scripture, but by the time I finish preparing the sermon, I usually have the text pretty well memorized.
Find the Main Point
In approaching the text, my primary interpretive goal is to find and articulate the main point the passage is teaching. This "big idea" (also known as the  thesis  or  proposition ) is very often connected with the main verb in the passage, though not necessarily so, especially in a parable or narrative passage. I ask myself questions like, "What is the primary message of this passage? What is the central truth? What is the main expositional idea?" Once I have found it, I write it out in a complete sentence because it is crucial that the main idea of the passage be clear in my own mind. Subsequent development of the text hinges on it.  Clearly explaining the main point of the passage is the target I aim for in my preaching. It is the primary message I want my people to retain after they hear the sermon. So it is crucial that the proposition be articulated carefully and clearly. Everything else in the sermon serves to help, impress, convict, and confront the hearer with the main truth. From the introduction to the conclusion, it all connects to the main truth.
Organize the Passage
After I find the main point, I begin to look for the subordinate points that support it. They will often be connected with the subordinate verbs, participles, or infinitives. This is the first step in outlining the passage. It also provides a confirmation of the main point. If the main thought I have determined for a passage is not broad enough to include all the other thoughts or is not fully supported by them, I need to rework it.  Let me illustrate the process of finding the main and subordinate points by looking at Matthew 28:19-20. The main verb is "make disciples," while "go," "baptizing," and "teaching" are all participles modifying the main verb. The main point, then, might be "how to make disciples." The subpoints would be "going," "baptizing," and "teaching." The sermon explains how to make disciples by fulfilling those three duties.
Analyze the Structure
After reading the passage and discovering the main and subordinate points, the next step is a detailed analysis of its words and grammar. I work through the passage in detail in the Greek text, taking notes on a legal-sized note pad. I look first for any problems in the passage, such as an important textual variant, an unusual word, or a difficult grammatical construction. At this point, I begin to use study tools such as linguistic keys, lexicons, concordances, word studies, and exegetical commentaries.  I also find it helpful to diagram the passage. I no longer write out the diagram since I can usually visualize it mentally. Diagramming each sentence helps make me aware of the grammatical structure and the relationships between different words and phrases within each sentence. When studying the grammar of a passage, I pay special attention to prepositions and the case of the nouns. After all, rightly understanding the passage may hinge on correctly identifying the direct object, the indirect object, and whether something is in apposition to something else. A working knowledge of English grammar is essential for this process.  At this point I also read as many good commentaries as I can to assist in the interpretation and to garner cross-references and theological insights.
Put Together an Exegetical Outline
As the final step in the study process, I put together a preliminary outline. It is not the outline I will preach from but is rather an exegetical outline drawn directly from my study of the text. It is not alliterated, and I may write down several different ways of stating each point. I purposely place this step toward the end of the study process. Doing even a preliminary outline before the detailed study of the passage increases the danger of forcing the text to fit our preconceived ideas. We must be careful to let the text speak for itself, rather than trying to bend it to fit an outline of our own creation. Placing the other steps first in the study process helps avoid this tendency.
Add Illustrations
After the outline is refined, I search for the best illustrations. I prefer biblical illustrations because they teach the Word while they illustrate, because they are God's choice of illustrative material, because Scripture interprets itself best, and because they have divine authority to go with human interest. Other illustrations can be added to these. Finally, I write the introduction and conclusion. I wait until the end to do this, so that I know exactly what I am introducing and concluding.
Careful Preparation Produces Confident Preaching
By studying diligently, thoroughly, and precisely, the expositor can be confident that he is rightly dividing the Word of truth. Having prepared properly, he can enter the pulpit with confidence - not only before his people, but also before his Lord - knowing that faithfulness to the message brings honor to the Master.  Rightly dividing the Word of truth, then, is the central mark of a truly successful preacher. In the end, when he stands before the Chief Shepherd, only one factor about his ministry will ultimately matter:  Was he faithful?  He may have been a dynamic orator, a master storyteller, and a winsome communicator. His church might have been large and his ministry well known. But if his own faithfulness is absent, all of those externals are merely wood, hay, and straw (cf. 1 Cor. 3:10-15). Only that which is done out of loyalty to Christ will be rewarded.  True success, then, is found in pleasing him. For pastors and teachers, this begins with guarding the truth by interpreting it accurately and proclaiming it articulately to the flock. Though it ends in the pulpit, such a stewardship begins in the study, as the man of God illumined by the Spirit of God studies the Word of God for the glory of God.  May we therefore approach our privileged task with sobriety and reverence, knowing that as teachers we shall receive a stricter judgment (James 3:1).
PART 2: BIBLICAL AND HISTORICAL PARADIGMS